394 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023FORUM – TREATMENT  - RESISTANT DEPRESSION: PROGRESS AND CHALLENGES
Treatment- resistant depression: definition, prevalence, detection, 
management, and investigational interventions
Roger S. McIntyre1-3, Mohammad Alsuwaidan3, Bernhard T. Baune4,5, Michael Berk5,6, Koen Demyttenaere7, Joseph F . Goldberg8, 
Philip Gorwood9, Roger Ho10,11, Siegfried Kasper12, Sidney H. Kennedy3, Josefina Ly- Uson13, Rodrigo B. Mansur3,  
R. Hamish McAllister- Williams14, James W. Murrough8, Charles B. Nemeroff15, Andrew A. Nierenberg16, Joshua D. Rosenblat3, 
Gerard Sanacora17, Alan F . Schatzberg18, Richard Shelton19, Stephen M. Stahl20, Madhukar H. Trivedi21, Eduard Vieta22, Maj Vinberg23, 
Nolan Williams18, Allan H. Y oung24, Mario Maj25
1Brain and Cognition Discovery Foundation, T oronto, ON, Canada; 2Department of Psychiatry, University of T oronto, T oronto, ON, Canada; 3Department of Pharmacology and T oxi-
cology, University of T oronto, T oronto, ON, Canada; 4Department of Psychiatry, University of Münster, Münster, Germany; 5Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Mel-
bourne, VIC, Australia; 6Deakin University IMPACT Institute, Geelong, VIC, Australia; 7Department of Psychiatry, Faculty of Medicine, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 8Department of Psychia-
try, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New Y ork, NY , USA; 9Department of Psychiatry, Sainte- Anne Hospital, Paris, France; 10Department of Psychological Medicine, Y ong Loo Lin 
School of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore; 11Institute for Health Innovation and Technology, National University of Singapore, Singapore; 12Department of Psychiatry 
and Psychotherapy and Center of Brain Research, Molecular Neuroscience Branch, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria; 13Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Medicine, 
University of The Philippines College of Medicine, Manila, The Philippines; 14Northern Center for Mood Disorders, Translational and Clinical Research Institute, Newcastle University, and 
Cumbria, Northumberland, Tyne and Wear NHS Foundation Trust, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; 15Department of Psychiatry, Dell Medical School, Austin, TX, USA; 16Dauten Family Center 
for Bipolar Treatment Innovation, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA; 17Department of Psychiatry, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA; 18Department of Psychiatry, Stan-
ford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA; 19Department of Psychiatry, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA; 20Department of Psychiatry, University 
of California, San Diego, CA, USA; 21Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA; 22Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Institute of Neuroscience, Hos-
pital Clinic, University of Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERSAM, Barcelona, Spain; 23Mental Health Centre, Northern Zealand, Copenhagen University Hospital -  Mental Health Services CPH, 
Copenhagen, Denmark; 24Department of Psychological Medicine, King’s College London, London, UK; 25Department of Psychiatry, University of Campania “Luigi Vanvitelli”, Naples, Italy
Treatment-  resistant depression (TRD) is common and associated with multiple serious public health implications. A consensus definition of TRD with demon -
strated predictive utility in terms of clinical decision-  making and health outcomes does not currently exist. Instead, a plethora of definitions have been 
proposed, which vary significantly in their conceptual framework. The absence of a consensus definition hampers precise estimates of the prevalence of 
TRD, and also belies efforts to identify risk factors, prevention opportunities, and effective interventions. In addition, it results in heterogeneity in clinical 
practice decision-  making, adversely affecting quality of care. The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) 
have adopted the most used definition of TRD (i.e., inadequate response to a minimum of two antidepressants despite adequacy of the treatment trial 
and adherence to treatment). It is currently estimated that at least 30% of persons with depression meet this definition. A significant percentage of persons 
with TRD are actually pseudo-  resistant (e.g., due to inadequacy of treatment trials or non- adherence to treatment). Although multiple sociodemographic, 
clinical, treatment and contextual factors are known to negatively moderate response in persons with depression, very few factors are regarded as pre-
dictive of non-  response across multiple modalities of treatment. Intravenous ketamine and intranasal esketamine (co- administered with an antidepres -
sant) are established as efficacious in the management of TRD. Some second- generation antipsychotics (e.g., aripiprazole, brexpiprazole, cariprazine, 
quetiapine XR) are proven effective as adjunctive treatments to antidepressants in partial responders, but only the olanzapine- fluoxetine combination 
has been studied in FDA- defined TRD. Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is established as effective and FDA- approved for individuals 
with TRD, with accelerated theta- burst TMS also recently showing efficacy. Electroconvulsive therapy is regarded as an effective acute and maintenance 
intervention in TRD, with preliminary evidence suggesting non-inferiority to acute intravenous ketamine. Evidence for extending antidepressant trial, 
medication switching and combining antidepressants is mixed. Manual- based psychotherapies are not established as efficacious on their own in TRD, 
but offer significant symptomatic relief when added to conventional antidepressants. Digital therapeutics are under study and represent a potential 
future clinical vista in this population.
Key words: Depression, treatment- resistant depression, difficult- to- treat depression, ketamine, esketamine, second- generation antipsychotics, neu-
rostimulation, electroconvulsive therapy, precision medicine, personalized medicine, patient- reported outcomes
(World Psychiatry 2023;22:394–412)
It is amply documented that major de-
pressive disorder (MDD) is highly prevalent 
and associated with substantial burden and 
economic costs1- 5. According to the World  
Health Organization (WHO), MDD is the   
sin gle largest contributor to loss of healthy  
life, and this contribution has apparently fur   -
ther increased during the COVID- 19 pan-
demic6 - 8.
Notwithstanding the evidence support ing 
the efficacy of conventional antide pres  sants 
as well as manual-based psychotherapies 
and  spe  cific neurostimulation modalities, 
the major  ity of individuals with MDD are 
inadequate ly responsive to first- line treat -ments. More  over, a substantial proportion 
of them fail mul tiple antidepressant inter -
ventions, result ing in what is described as 
treat ment- resis tant depression (TRD)5,9- 16.
Although non-response is a common out -
come of treatment with multiple convention -
al antidepressants, a consensus definition of 
TRD with predictive utility does not current  ly 
exist. Instead, a host of definitions have 
been proposed, differing in their conceptual  
frame  work, operational criteria and working 
as sumptions. This heterogeneity of defini -
tions has resulted in a wide range of esti  -  
mat  es of the prevalence of TRD16. The pro  -  
por tion of people with TRD would be ex  -  pected to be higher when multidimension -  
al defini  tions are used, especially those in-
cluding pa  tient- reported outcomes17,18.
There are multiple serious public health  
im plications associated with TRD, which 
pro vide the impetus for a specific focus on  
its detection and algorithmic management.  
First, TRD is common in the general popu-
lation: based on international epidemiolo -
gical esti  mates, it is extrapolated that more  
than 100 mil  lion people globally meet one 
or more def  initions of this condition19. In 
 addi  tion, cost of illness studies have docu-
mented  stag  ger ing direct and indirect eco-
nom  ic costs as  so ciated with MDD, of which 
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 395
more than half globally are attributable to  
TRD20.
The relatively higher cost of illness attri-
buted to TRD is directly due to higher health 
care utilization and the need for higher inten -
sity treatments20- 23. Higher indirect costs are  
also reported in TRD as a consequence of rel-
atively greater impairment in psychoso  cial  
function, greater need for disability benefits, 
higher workplace disability and absentee-
ism, as well as the negative impact on carers  
10, 21,24- 35. Moreover, the rate of suicidality, in-
clud  ing completed suicide, is disproportion -
ately high er in TRD populations36.
Additional public health implications of  
TRD relate to the established association be-     
tween MDD and multiple common and chro-     
nic non- communicable physical diseases37-
 39. For example, it is established that MDD 
is a risk factor for cardiovascular dis  ease, 
obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus, and this  
is especially apparent in individ uals with 
more severe and/or persistent  de pressive 
syndromes, which are over-represented in 
TRD populations40,41.
Notwithstanding the foregoing public 
health implications of TRD, relatively few 
interventions have been established as effi-
cacious for persons having multiple failed 
trials with conventional antidepressants. 
Instead, the emphasis of treatment develop-
ment in depressive disorders has been on 
non-  TRD populations. In addition, preven -
tion of TRD is not a national health policy 
priority in any country worldwide, nor is 
prog  ress in its man  agement a quality out -
come measure in any na  tional public health 
care system.
Currently, more than 90 clinical practice 
guidelines are available that aim to provide  
decision support to clinicians caring for a  -  
dults with mood disorders, originating from  
83 coun  tries and published in 27 languag -
es42. Most of them have been produced in  
high-  income countries and integrate scien  -    
tific evi  dence with expert opinion42- 45. Major 
limitations of extant guidelines, as it specifi-
cally relates to TRD, are that they do not adopt 
a con  sensus definition of this condition, and 
are not consistent in their selection or se-
quencing of rec ommendations.
In addition, extant guidelines vary in how  
they define an adequate antidepressant reg-
imen and frequently conflate the treatment  
of TRD with non-  TRD populations (i.e., par  -     tial responders to antidepressants). For ex -
ample, second- generation antipsychot  ics 
(SGAs), of which most have not been prov  en  
to be effective in TRD, are often recommend -
ed for this condition in combination with 
 antidepressants, despite their evidentiary 
base comprised largely of populations de -
fined as partial responders to antidepres -
sants.
Herein, we aim to provide a synthesis of 
current definitions of TRD, with an empha-     
sis on their limitations, and recommenda-
tions for the development of an improved 
consen  sus definition; to summarize best 
estimates of the prevalence of TRD on the 
basis of cur  rent definitions; to review the 
available evidence on risk factors for TRD; 
to provide  rec  ommendations concerning 
the detection and management of TRD, 
based on research evidence when available 
and opinions from  in  ternational experts; 
and to review investigational interventions 
for TRD. We do not in  tend to review and/
or supplant existing rec ommendations for  
depression which is not treatment-  resis  -
tant44- 48.
DEFINITIONS OF TREATMENT- 
RESISTANT DEPRESSION
The absence of a consensus and validated  
definition of TRD is a major limitation from 
the viewpoints of translational research, 
treatment development, as well as clinical and 
policy decision- making. Indeed, the pathway 
towards more targeted treatments in psy  chi-
atry re  quires a more precise delinea  tion of the 
phe notype being evaluated 49- 51.
The lack of a consensus definition results 
in the heterogeneity of populations enrolled 
in clinical trials evaluating new interventions  
for TRD, greatly limiting the interpretability 
and generalizability of the results. At a clin -
ical level, the heterogeneity of patient samples 
con  tributes to differences in recommenda-
tions on the sequencing of treatments for peo-
ple not responding to conventional first- line  
antidepressants. Disparity in practice behav -
ior is likely compromising optimal health 
outcomes amongst those living with and re-    
ceiving interventions for TRD. Moreover, from  
a policy perspective, reimbursement and ac -
cess to treatment for populations with TRD  
will understandably vary in the absence of a universal definition, further compromising 
real- world outcomes in these patients.
The definition of TRD adopted by the US 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA)52 and 
the European Medicines Agency (EMA)53 is  
failure to respond to two or more antidepre s-
sant regimens despite adequate dose and  
du ration and adherence to treatment. These 
regulatory agencies recognize the lack of pre-
cision of this definition and its overlap with 
definitions of “partial response” to antide-
pressant treatment53. The EMA definition,  
contrary to the FDA one, explicitly states that  
the failed antidepressants can be from the  
same or different mechanistic classes. Lim -
itations of the FDA and EMA defini tions are  
that they do not explicitly operationalize  
non-re sponse, and do not consider psycho-  
ther  apeutic inter  ventions, regarded as first-  
line treatments for mild or moderate de-
pression by most guide lines48.
Other definitions of TRD have tried to 
 over  come one or more of the above draw-
backs (see Table 1). A commonly cited frame-
work for the definition of inadequate re-  
sponse to antidepressants is the Thase and 
Rush stag  ing model54,55. This model does not 
define TRD categorically, but instead oper -
ationa lizes and tacitly implies TRD along a 
continuum of failed antidepressant trials. 
Stage I is defined by failure of at least one ad-
equate trial of one major class of antidepres -
sants; stage II by failure of at least two ade -
quate trials of at least two distinctly different 
classes of antidepressants; stage III by stage 
II resistance plus failure of an adequate trial 
of a tricyclic antidepressant (TCA); stage IV  
by stage III resistance plus failure of an ad-
equate trial of a monoamine oxidase inhib-
itor (MAOI); and stage V by stage IV resis -
tance plus failure of a course of bilateral elec -
troconvulsive therapy (ECT). In the text of the 
reference paper, it is made clear that the first 
trial should be a 4- week one with a selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) in mod-
erate dosages54.
Strengths of the Thase and Rush model 
are its simplicity, pragmatism, and close prox -
im ity to behavior in everyday clinical practice. 
In addition, this model prioritizes treatments  
that are better tolerated, which is in line with 
clinical practice guidelines and treatment 
algorithms. A first limitation of the model is  
that “failure” of treatment trials is not oper -
ationalized. Furthermore, the model reflects 
396 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023
Table 1 Definitions of treatment- resistant depression (TRD)
FDA EMAThase & 
RushMaudsley 
Model GSRD DM- TRD MGH- S
Categorical definition + + – + + + – 
Number of requested treatment failures 2 2 1 1 2 1 1
Operationalization of “failure” of treatment – – – – + – – 
Indication that failed antidepressants must be of different classes – – + – + – – 
Indication of required duration of failed treatments + + + + + + +
Implication of a hierarchy of efficacy of antidepressants – + + – – – – 
Failure of psychotherapies included – – – – – + – 
Failure of ECT included – – + + – + +
Failure of augmentation/combination treatments included – – – + – + +
Patient- reported outcomes considered – – – – – – – 
Baseline severity included – – – + + + –  
Duration of current episode included – – – + + + – 
Baseline psychosocial impairment included – – – – – + – 
Presence of comorbidities included – – – – – + +
Comorbid anxiety symptoms included – – – – – + +
Comorbid personality disorder included – – – – – + +
Quality of life included – – – – – – – 
History of psychosocial stressors included – – – – – + – 
History of childhood adversity included – – – – – – – 
FDA –  US Food and Drug Administration, EMA –  European Medicines Agency, GSRD –  European Group for the Study of Resistant Depression, DM- TRD –  
Dutch Measure for quantification of Treatment Resistant Depression, MGH- S –  Massachusetts General Hospital Staging, ECT –  electroconvulsive therapy
some non-  validated assumptions: for in-
stance that, in a patient initially not respond-
ing to an SSRI, a non- classmate antidepres -
sant is more likely to be efficacious as a next-  
step treatment strategy; or that MAOI expo-
sure should be limited to populations with 
treatment resistance. In addition, there is no 
explicit consideration of depression features 
such as duration and severity of the index e -  
pisode, and no mention of psychotherapeu tic 
interventions. Finally, although augmenta-
tion or combination strategies are mention  ed 
in the text of the reference paper54, they are 
not explicitly included in the staging mod el.
The Maudsley Staging Model (MSM) was  
developed to improve upon the limitations of  
the Thase and Rush model56. It defines treat -
ment resistance as failure to attain signifi-
cant level of improvement (i.e., clinical re -
mission) from an accurately diagnosed de -
pressive episode following treatment with 
an antidepressant given at an adequate dose 
for a minimum of six weeks. Three dimen sions 
of resistance are included: treatment failure, 
duration of the depressive episode, and se -verity of depression56.
A maximum of seven points can be as -
signed for the treatment dimension: one 
point for failure on 1-  2 medications; two 
points for failure on 3- 4 medications; three 
points for failure on 5-  6 medications; four 
points for failure on 7- 10 medications; five 
points for failure on more than 10 medica-
tions. One further point is assigned if aug-
mentation treatment has failed, and one 
fur ther point if ECT has not been effective.  
A maximum of three points can be assigned 
for the duration of the depressive episode:  
one if the episode is acute (up to 12 months);  
two if it is subacute (from 13 to 24 months); 
three if it is chronic (more than 24 months). 
A maximum of five points can be assigned 
for the severity of depression: one if it is sub-
syndromal; two if it is mild; three if it is mod-
erate; four if it is severe without psychosis; 
and five if it is severe with psychosis. The 
overall staging of TRD is defined as mild 
(total score between 3 and 6), moderate (to-
tal score between 7 and 10) or severe (total 
score between 11 and 15).Thus, in the MSM, resistance is assessed 
on the basis not only of treatment but also 
of illness variables, which has been report -
ed to be useful in predicting short-  and inter -
mediate-  term outcomes in TRD  popula -
tions57,58. Overall, the threshold for the def -
inition of TRD is low, requiring failure of just  
one adequate treatment. Failure of treatment  
is not operationalized, although a discussion  
of the complexity of defining clinical remis -
sion is provided in the text of the main paper  
presenting the model56. The assignment of 
scorings is in some respects arbitrary: for in-
stance, a differential weighting is assigned to  
populations who fail at least five vs. less than 
five treatments, in the absence of validation. 
Failure of manual-based psychotherapies is 
not considered.
The European Group for the Study of Re-
sistant Depression (GSRD)14 separately de-
fined non- response (failure to respond to one 
trial of 6- 8 week duration of any antidepres -
sant treatment); TRD (failure to respond to  
two or more adequate trials of different class -
es of antidepressants, with five different lev  els 
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 397
of resistance depending on the overall du -
ration of trials); and chronic resistant depres -
sion (failure to respond to several antide  pres-   
sant trials, including augmentation strategies, 
of the overall duration of at least 12 months)  
14.
Strengths of the GSRD staging method 
are the explicit definition of treatment non-  
response as a reduction of less than 50% in 
the total score on the Hamilton Depression 
Rating Scale (HAM- D)59 or the Montgomery-  
Åsberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS)60, 
and the lack of any implicit hierarchy of ef -
ficacy of antidepressants. Limitations are the  
lack of validation of any of the provided time-  
 based subcategories, including the definition  
of chronic depression based on a duration of  
at least one year, which is considerably brief -
er than what is generally accepted (i.e., long -
er than two years).
The Dutch Measure for quantification of  
Treatment Resistant Depression Model (DM-  
TRD) was developed to improve upon the  
point system proposed in the MSM61. To the  
variables considered in that system, this 
mod  el adds functional impairment (with 
a score from 0, no impairment, to 3, severe  
impairment); comorbid anxiety sy mptoms 
(with a score from 0, not present, to 1, fulfill-
ing criteria for at least one DSM- IV anxiety 
disorder); comorbid personality disorder 
(with a score from 0, not present, to 1, pres -
ent based on formal interview); psy  chosocial 
stressors (with a score of 0, no psychosocial 
stressor, or 1, at least one psy  cho  social stress -
or); several categories of aug mentation/
combination regimens (with a score from 
0, not used, to 3, five or six medications); use 
of psychotherapy (with a score from 0, not 
used, to 2, at least two empirical ly supported 
psychotherapies); and intensi fied treatment 
(with a score from 0, not used, to 2, inpatient 
treatment). The maximum total score be-
comes 27.
This model is the most comprehensive in  
terms of variables included, although phys -
i cal comorbidities and childhood adversi-
ties are not considered. As in the MSM, the  
thresh  old for the definition of TRD is low,  
re quiring failure of just one adequate treat -
ment, and non- response is not operational-
ized. The predictive validity of the model has  
been supported to some extent61.
The Massachusetts General Hospital Stag-
ing Model (MGH-  S) definition of TRD inte -grates the number of failed trials with the  
in tensity/optimization of each trial, without  
as sumptions on the hierarchy of antidepres-  
sant classes62. One point is as  signed for non-  
response to each adequate trial of a mar -
keted antidepressant (duration of at least six 
weeks and adequate dosage). Half a point 
is as  sign ed for each trial based on optimiza-
tion of dose, optimization of du ration, or an  
aug menta  tion/combination strategy. Three 
points are assigned for non-  response to ECT.
Limitations of the MGH-  S include the lack  
of operationalization of “failure” of trials;  
the arbitrary scores attributed to treatments; 
the fact that optimization of dose or dura  tion  
of treatment is weighted equally as aug  men -
tation/combination strategies (which is not 
empirically supported); and the assignment 
of one point for each failed antidepressant, 
which may generate a very high total score63.
None of the extant TRD definitions are 
 universally accepted and/or implemented at 
point- of- care in clinical practice11,32,64- 68. In  
addition, no existing TRD definition is sup-
ported by an external validator and/or bio-
marker. Most TRD definitions do not explic-
itly consider failure of manual-based psy -
chotherapies in their hierarchical character -
ization of treat ment resistance. As psycho-
therapeutic inter  ventions are recommend-
ed as first- line treat ments in persons pre-
senting with de pres  sion of mild or moder -
ate severity, any working definition of TRD 
with clinical utility will need to explicitly in-
clude non- response to these interventions.
Also, common across most definitions of  
TRD is the absence of a quantifiable and con-
sensus endpoint defining response versus  
non- response to antidepressants. An addi -
tional limitation is that the definition of out-    
come is based on a clinician assess  ment, while 
patient- reported outcomes are not consider -
ed. Indeed, even amongst patients classified 
as “responders” , many con  tinue to manifest 
debili tating residual sym  ptoms69,70. This was  
highlighted in the STAR* D trial, in which it 
was ob served that only 10% of persons “in 
re mission” were fully asymptomatic71. If, for  
example, a person is classified as “responder”  
to treat ment but continues to experience cog-  
ni tive deficits that are impairing, it would be 
incorrect to consider this an adequate anti -
depressant response72.
None of the extant definitions of TRD in-
cludes reference to quality of life. This is a ma -jor limitation, given the importance assigned  
to this variable by persons with lived experi-
ence73. The predictive utility of quality of life 
as a critical outcome measure when defining 
TRD is underscored by the observation that 
persons remitting with antidepressants who 
continue to report decreased quality of life are 
at greater risk of relapse and recurrence74,75.
Further drawbacks of existing TRD defi-
nitions are that they fail to take into consid-
eration the social, economic, anamnestic (e.g., 
adverse childhood experiences) and inter -
personal factors which, alone or in combi-
nations, are known to moderate antidepres -
sant response1,44,47,71,75- 81. Furthermore, an 
unintended consequence of a TRD frame-
work that is hierarchical is encouraging mul -
tiple unproven treatment strategies, with poly -
pharmacy and the possibility of associated 
safety and tolerability concerns70,75.
Moreover, results of a recent analysis in  
the WHO World Mental Health Surveys un -
derscores that persistence with next-  step 
treat  ments is uncommon in persons with  
MDD82. Also, in those who do switch to next-
step treat ments, a considerable treatment 
delay (i.e., 6- 9 months) elapses before switch -
ing occurs82,83.
An example of a patient-  centric frame -
work describing persons with multiple anti -
depressant failures is the construct of diffi-
cult- to- treat depression (DTD)84. This con-
struct relies on a biopsychosocial approach 
when considering causal, perpetuating and  
treatment factors of poor outcomes in de-
pression70. The therapeutic emphasis in DTD  
pivots away from symptomatic remission to-
wards symptomatic control, functional re-
covery and quality of life improvement as 
part of chronic disease management70.
For several patients, despite non- remis -
sion status, more modest improvement in 
overall depressive symptom severity may re-
sult in significant self- assessed improvement  
in well- being85- 87. For example, an approxi-
mate 35% improvement from baseline in to-
tal MADRS score may be associated with 
significant improvement of quality of life in 
persons with TRD87. These data support the 
notion that more modest improvements in 
symptom severity in persons with TRD may  
be clinically meaningful, and invite the need  
for multidimensional definitions that are not  
solely dependent on threshold symptom -
atic improvement86,88,89.
398 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023
Surveys of persons with lived depression  
experience have highlighted the importance  
of dimensional symptomatic outcomes in  
addition to categorical ones90,91. For exam-
ple, alleviation of emotional blunting, anhe-
donia, anxiety and rumination are often pri-
oritized by persons living with depression  
over full symptomatic remission92. Shared-  
decision making, patient- centered care fo -
cusing on specific symptoms of concern, and  
integrating treatment modalities become  
paramount in DTD, in keeping with the guid -
ing principles of chronic disease man  age-
ment84,93- 96. Although DTD is not currently 
recognized by regulators as a pathway for 
treatment approval and marketing autho-
rization, it more closely approximates real-  
world presentations and outcomes among 
persons with TRD, and could serve as a clin-
ical heuristic or even a framework inform-
ing the further characterization of TRD.
Overall, there is a confluence of research, 
clinical, policy, and public health reasons to  
have a validated and universal TRD defini-
tion. Existing definitions would be best char -
acterized as frameworks that vary in their 
constituent variables and working assump-
tions. The existing TRD frameworks reviewed 
herein have not provided any substantive in -
sight into the pathogenesis, treatment dis -
covery and development, or clinical care of 
persons with TRD.
Moreover, there is no compelling evidence  
that any of the foregoing TRD frameworks 
have been implemented at large scale by the  
clinical or research community. A consensus 
definition of TRD at the very least will need 
to provide a quantifiable endpoint defining 
re sponse, integrate manual-based psycho -
therapies, empirically validate assumptions 
surrounding differential treatment weight -
ing, and integrate multiple factors known to 
influence antidepressant response. A TRD 
definition that is consistent across disparate 
clinical care ecosystems, and fulfills both re-
search and clinical needs, is badly needed.
PREVALENCE OF TREATMENT- 
RESISTANT DEPRESSION
Differences in the definition of TRD have 
resulted in highly variable estimates of its 
prevalence rate99. TRD is often stated to af -
fect approximately 30% of persons receiving antidepressant treatment in research set -
tings, while its prevalence in real world prac-    
tice is estimated to range between 6 and 55%  
32,98- 101.
Most individuals with MDD access men-
tal health care initially through the primary  
care system, where measurement- based care  
is rarely implemented102- 104. A tentative es -
timate of the prevalence of TRD in primary  
care can be made only indirectly by using a  
“de pression treatment cascade” approach105.  
Approximately 10- 15% of patients in pri-
mary care present with clinically significant 
depressive symptoms, and only about half 
of these cases are diagnosed, of which an es -
timated 25% are prescribed an antidepres -
sant106. Replicated evidence indicates that, 
of those prescribed antidepressants, the ma-
jority discontinue treatment prematurely.  
Hence, only about 5- 7% of persons with de-  
  pres  sion treated in primary care settings 
would be expected to achieve remission106. 
The foregoing cascade approach –  which in-
tegrates aspects of misdiagnosis, non-  ad-
herence, inadequate treatment trials, as well  
as implementation gaps –  underscores the 
high prevalence of poor outcomes of depres -
sion in primary care, of which a significant 
percentage would be expected to meet crite-
ria for TRD10,30,64,71,107,108.
A more precise estimate of the prevalence  
of TRD can be done by referring to the Se-
quenced Treatment Alternatives to Relieve 
Depression (STAR* D) trial, a National Insti-
tute of Mental Health (NIMH)-  sponsored 
multisite study (18 primary care and 23 psy-
chiatric care settings) carried out in the US33. 
All eligible subjects enrolled in the STAR* D 
trial initiated treatment with citalopram. Af -
ter a 12- week trial (level 1 treatment), those  
persons not in remission were randomly  
as signed to one of seven switch/combina-
tion approaches (level 2). Non- response to  
a switch/combination level 2 treatment re-
sulted in randomization to further treat -
ments (levels 3 and 4). The FDA and EMA 
definitions of TRD would align with failure 
to level 1 and 2 treatments in the STAR*D 
trial. On this basis, it can be estimated that  
approximately 55% of persons with MDD  
would meet the FDA/EMA criteria for TRD  
(i.e., in  adequate response to two or more  
antide  pres  sants despite adequate treatment  
inten  sity and duration)33.
In summary, while it is often stated that TRD is affecting approximately 30% of per -
sons receiving antidepressant treatment, a 
more stringent and multidimensional defi-
nition of this condition emphasizing symp-
tomatic remission increases this estimate to 
about 55%.
RISK FACTORS FOR TREATMENT- 
RESISTANT DEPRESSION
Many factors have been identified as be-
ing associated with reduced antidepressant 
response, but relatively few are established as 
risk factors specifically for TRD. In addition, 
most factors identified as negatively affect -
ing antidepressant outcomes are reported in 
small studies and are described with a partic -
ular antidepressant intervention. Amongst 
the relatively few studies that have sought to 
identify factors associated with TRD, most 
are limited by the inconsistent definition of 
this condition, and primarily evaluate out -
comes with monoamine- based antidepres -
sants.
Herein, we endeavour to identify factors 
that are associated with TRD. As most studies  
have evaluated factors associated with re-
duced response to conventional antidepres -
sants rather than TRD, we provide clarity 
and attempt to separate these two aspects.
Sociodemographic factors
It is established that older persons more 
frequently fail multiple monoamine-based 
antidepressant treatments, which may be tak -
en as evidence that TRD is more com mon  
in this subpopulation109, 110. However, there 
is no evidence of an attenuated re sponse in 
older adults with depression re  ceiv ing man-
ual-based psychotherapeutic treatments 111,  
and the efficacy of ECT does not seem to be  
reduced as a function of age 112. It is also re-
ported that repetitive transcra  nial magnet  ic 
stimulation (rTMS) may have similar (or po-
tentially great  er with increased pulse dose) 
efficacy in older adults with MDD 113.
It is not established whether female sex is 
a risk factor for TRD114. Whether depression 
during reproductive life events (e.g., peri-
partum onset depression) is more likely to 
be treatment- resistant is also not sufficient -
ly established115. It is, however, well known 
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 399
that females are affected by depression at 
twice the rate of males, and are more likely 
to be prescribed antidepressants116. Conse-
quently, females would be expected to rep-
resent the majority within a TRD popula -
tion, although it remains uncertain whether 
their relative risk is higher.
Socioeconomic position is a risk factor 
for TRD in persons receiving monoamine-  
based antidepressants. For example, in the  
STAR *D trial, persons meeting level 2 cri -
teria (i.e., inadequate response to two seque  n-
tial antidepressant regimens) were more 
likely to report lower income and depen -
dence on the public health system117. In ad  di-
tion, persons of lower educational attain -
ment or unemployed are found to be more  
often resistant to multiple sequential anti-
depressant strategies17,118.
Future research should evaluate whether 
racial and/or ethnic factors contribute to 
the occurrence of TRD, and also endeavour 
to explore whether sexual orientation and/
or gender identity, marital status, interper -
sonal connectedness, and measures of lone-
liness are risk factors for TRD.
Adverse experiences and trauma
It is well established that childhood mal-
treatment is associated with greater severity of 
depression, earlier age at onset, cognitive dys -
function, presence of psychotic symptoms, 
and physical/psychiatric comorbidities, each 
of which is also associated with at  tenuated 
response to antidepressants and manual-  
based psychological interventions 119- 123.
There are also studies providing evidence 
that a reported history of childhood emo -
tional abuse is associated with recurrent 
depression, persistent depression, as well as 
treatment resistance to antidepressants124. 
The international Study to Predict Opti-
mized Treatment for Depression (iSPOT- D) 
reported that, amongst adults with MDD 
and a history of trauma between the ages of  
4 and 7 years, only 15.9% achieved remis -
sion after 8 weeks of treatment with escital-
opram, sertraline or venlafaxine, compared 
to 84.1% in individuals with no history of 
childhood trauma125.
The attenuated response to antidepres -
sants in persons with a history of childhood 
maltreatment may not, however, occur with  all antidepressants. For example, prelimi-
nary evidence suggests that response to vor -
tioxetine or ketamine treatment in depres -
sion is not reduced in persons with trauma, 
suggesting different outcomes as a function 
of the putative mechanism of action of medi -
cations126,127.
More in general, life stress events have 
been directly associated with a poorer re-
sponse to commonly prescribed antidepres -
sants, as well as with a greater occurrence of 
suicidal behavior and comorbidities and a  
greater severity of symptoms, which are var -
iables that could mediate the association 
with an attenuated response to antidepres -
sants and possibly to TRD128.
Clinical factors
Greater baseline severity is a highly rep-
licated risk factor for TRD, and is indeed in-
cluded in some frameworks as a variable in  
the hierarchical characterization of the con-
dition. Illness duration is also highly asso-
ciated with TRD, with replicated evidence 
indicating that the length of a depressive ep-
isode is inversely proportional to the prob-
ability of treatment response129.
Evidence also suggests that some pheno-
menological characteristics of depression 
may be associated with treatment resistance.  
Psychotic symptoms affect approximately 20%  
of adults with MDD and are highly associat -
ed with TRD130. Mixed features are reported 
to be present in approximately 25% of per -
sons with MDD and are associated with at -
tenuated antidepressant response, although  
it remains to be determined whether they 
are a risk factor specifically for TRD47,131.
Anhedonia is a core component of de-
pression endorsed by 35- 75% of patients, 
and may be a risk factor for TRD in persons 
whose treat ment history is delimited to SSRIs  
132,133. Cognitive deficits in MDD are prev -
alent, persistent, and often progressively 
increase as a function of illness severity and 
duration; they are associated with attenu ated 
response to select antidepressants, and may 
represent a risk factor for TRD72, 134- 136.
Anxiety symptoms are frequently report -
ed in TRD populations, and their presence 
in MDD is associated with a more severe 
 ill ness presentation, lower probability of re-
mis sion, comorbidities and suicidality137- 140. Results from the STAR *D trial indicate 
that persons presenting with anxious de -
pression exhibit attenuated antidepressant 
response and are more likely to develop 
TRD141. The GSRD study also reported that 
anxiety disorders were over- represented in 
persons meeting criteria for TRD142.
It is well established that TRD popula -
tions have a higher rate of psychiatric and 
physical comorbidities as compared to non-  
TRD populations143. In addition, TRD is a 
risk factor for incident physical comorbidi-
ties, such as cardiovascular disease, type 2 
diabetes mellitus, osteoporosis, and meta-
bolic syndrome40,144-  146. Evidence indicates 
that the foregoing physical diseases are in 
their turn risk factors for TRD145,147- 152.
DETECTION OF TREATMENT- 
RESISTANT DEPRESSION
The assessment of an individual with 
MDD towards personalization of treatment 
selec tion and sequencing has been previous -
ly reviewed in this journal13. Herein, we specif -
ically focus on the assessment process aimed 
to confirm that TRD is present, and to rule out 
the possibility of pseudo- resistance.
Reviewed herein are the most common 
modifiable contributors to pseudo- resis -
tance, including inaccuracy of the MDD di-
agnosis, inadequacy of current and past 
treatment trials, inaccurate assessment of 
response, and individual differences in the 
metabolism of antidepressants153,154.
Accurate diagnosis of MDD
Inaccuracy of the MDD diagnosis is a com-  
  mon reason for pseudo- resistance. It is esti -
mated that approximately half of individ uals 
with MDD are not correctly diagnosed 155. A 
not uncommon scenario in clinical prac  tice is 
the depressed patient presenting with resis -
tance to multiple sequential antidepressants 
whose correct diagnosis should be bipolar 
disorder instead of MDD156.
For most individuals with bipolar disor -
der, depression is the index presentation, 
which warrants reconsideration of the MDD 
diagnosis in any person presenting with TRD.  
Indeed, it is reported that individuals pre-
scribed multiple failed antidepressant trials 
400 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023
(i.e., TRD) have a much greater likelihood of 
an underlying diagnosis of bipolar disorder 
as compared to persons prescribed a single 
antidepressant trial157. Furthermore, it is re-
ported that the transition from a diagnosis of 
MDD to one of bipolar disorder occurs at a 
rate of approximately 1- 3% per year, indicat -
ing that diagnostic assessment must be re-
considered in all TRD presentations130,158,159.
Multiple screening tools for bipolar disor -
der have been validated, including the Rapid 
Mood Screener (RMS)160, the Patient Mania 
Questionnaire (PMQ)161, the Mood Disorder 
Questionnaire (MDQ)162, and the Hypoma -
nia Checklist-  32163. Although screen  ing tools 
are not sufficient to diagnose bipo lar disor -
der, they can be used routinely in clin ical prac -
tice and, if positive, warrant a more compre -
hensive assessment of the possible presence 
of bipolar disorder.
In addition to screening for bipolar disor -
der, relevant comorbid conditions should be 
diagnosed and managed if present. They in-
clude substance and alcohol use disorders,  
anxiety disorders, personality disorders, and  
some physical diseases such as hypothyroid-
ism.
Determining the adequacy of 
treatment trials
The adequacy of an antidepressant treat -
ment refers to the choice of medication, its  
dose, the duration of treatment, and the pa-
tient’s adherence. A comprehensive and 
precise characterization of current and past 
med  ication regimens is required in order 
to confirm the presence of TRD, and can be 
captured by several instruments.
The Antidepressant Treatment History 
Form (ATHF) is a data capture instrument 
suitable for implementation at point- of- care. 
It was originally developed in studies of ECT 
and has subsequently undergone a broader  
clinical and research application164. It has 
ex plicit criteria for evaluating response to 
phar  macological and neurostimulation 
treatments, and is also available in a shorter 
version (the ATHF-  Short Form, ATHF-  SF)  
165. Other instruments that capture and re-     
cord current and prior antidepressant reg-
imens are the self- rated Massachusetts Gen-
eral Hos  pital Antidepressant Treatment Re-
sponse Questionnaire (ATRQ)166 and the Maudsley Treatment Inventory56.
First of all, the appropriateness of the anti-
depressant regimen needs to be confirmed. 
It is well established that a knowledge- im-
plementation gap exists between what are 
proven treatment strategies in MDD and 
what are actually implemented42. The ade-
quacy of the dose of the medication has then 
to be considered: dosing recommendations 
are established for all approved antidepres -
sants and are described in their respective 
product monographs.
The adequate duration of an antidepres -
sant trial is generally considered to be 4- 6 
weeks at optimal dosing, although 60% of  
persons who achieved remission in the 
STAR *D trial with level 1 treatment did so 
after week 6 of treatment, indicating that a 
subpopulation of adults with MDD may re-
quire lon  ger treatment trials167,168.
Adherence to treatment has also to be as -
sessed. A replicated observation is the high 
rate of non-  adherence to antidepressants in 
persons with MDD. Persons with less than 
80% adherence to antidepressant regimen 
 recommendations are commonly defined as  
non- adherent169. Using this definition, about 
30- 50% of persons prescribed with antide-
pressants are non-  adherent in acute phase 
treatment169. Assessing adherence to therapy 
includes pill counts and patient self- report. Dig -
ital sensor systems have been used in academic 
studies to document adherence, but are not 
re adily available for clinical implementation.
Assessing outcome of previous 
antidepressant trials
Defining TRD implies quantification of  
therapeutic outcome with previous antide -
pressant treatments. However, as already 
stated, most definitions of TRD do not pro -
vide a quantifiable and consensus endpoint  
defining response versus non- response to  
an tidepressants. An exception is the GSRD 
staging method14, which explicitly defines 
treatment non- response as a reduction of 
less than 50% in the total score on the HAM-
 D or the MADRS. This may represent a use-
ful reference in ordinary clinical practice.
However, it is noticed that, in some pa-
tients, a reduction of total MADRS score of 
about 35% may be associated with signif    -
icant improvement of quality of life87, sup-porting the need for multidimensional def -
initions that are not solely dependent on 
threshold symptomatic improvement86,88,89. 
The use of measures such as the World Health  
Organi zation- Five Well- Being Index (WHO- 5)  
may be suggested for this purpose170. More 
in general, therapeutic endpoints that inte   grate 
patient- reported outcomes along with symp -
tomatic measures may provide a more precise 
characterization of response to treatment82.
Although “failure” of one or more antide-
pressant trials is an integral part of all defini-
tions of TRD, it must be acknowledged that 
there is no consensus in the field about how 
this “failure” should be defined and ascer -
tained. Overcoming this major limitation is an 
obvious priority for future research on TRD.
Pharmacogenomic testing and 
evaluating antidepressant blood 
levels
Evidence indicates that a subset of MDD 
patients presenting with TRD may exhibit 
a failed antidepressant response as a con-
sequence of a suboptimal bioavailability 
of the administered antidepressant, due to 
rapid metabolizer status171-  174. Available evi-
dence indicates that allelic variations of cy-
tochromes P450- 2D6 (CYP2D6) and P450-  
2C19 (CY P2C19) are especially associated 
with antidepressant outcome. In particular, 
CYP2D6 phenotypes may be important in 
some pa  tients taking TCAs and venlafaxine, 
and CY  P2C19 phenotypes in some individ -
uals receiving TCAs, citalopram, escitalo-
pram and sertraline171. Although pharma-
cogenetic testing cannot be recommended 
as a routine assessment in TRD, some pre-
liminary evidence does suggest that, in se -
lect circumstances, it may be warranted.
Furthermore, blood levels should be mon-
itored in non- responding persons receiving 
some TCAs (i.e., imipramine, desip ramine, 
nortriptyline), as therapeutic levels/win dows 
have been established for these agents 175- 177.
MANAGEMENT OF TREATMENT- 
RESISTANT DEPRESSION
Herein, we review tactics which can be 
considered for managing TRD once the pres -
ence of this condition is confirmed. These 
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 401
tactics include extending the current anti -
depressant trial, switching antidepressants, 
combining antidepressants, use of esketa -
mine/ketamine, and neurostimulation (see 
Table 2).
Although manual- based psychotherapies are not proven to be efficacious as a stand -
alone intervention in TRD, their efficacy in 
combination with antidepressants is briefly 
 reviewed. Also, we briefly review the evi-
dence for other strategies (e.g., lithium, thy-
roid hormone) that are better established in patients with partial response to TCAs and 
MAOIs rather than principally studied in TRD.
We also review data for SGAs, despite the 
fact that –  with the exception of the olanza-  
pine-fluoxetine combination –   these medica -
tions are not approved for TRD, but only for 
Table 2 Options for management of treatment- resistant depression (TRD)
Option Rationale Limitations
Extending antidepressant trial Delayed time to response amongst subpopulations with 
TRD.Modest evidence base supporting the strategy.
Unlikely to be acceptable to most patients living with TRD.
Alternative strategies for TRD better established  
(e.g., ECT, esketamine).
Switching antidepressants Mechanistically dissimilar antidepressants from different 
classes may offer improved health outcomes in TRD in 
some cases.
Especially appropriate when index antidepressant class is 
poorly tolerated.Modest evidence base supporting the strategy.
Newly initiated antidepressant will require at least 
4 weeks before outcome can be assessed.
Combining antidepressants May target symptoms not responding to index 
antidepressant (e.g., fatigue, cognitive impairment, sleep 
problems).
May improve tolerability via antidote of emergent adverse 
events (e.g., bupropion for antidepressant- induced sexual 
dysfunction).Limited evidence base in TRD.
Potential for drug- drug interactions.
Decreased adherence with polypharmacy regimens.
Greater cost of treatment.
Ketamine Acute efficacy established in TRD.
Beneficial effects on suicidality.
Rapid onset of symptomatic improvement.Insufficient long- term efficacy, tolerability and safety 
data.
Access to treatment limited in many jurisdictions.
Specialized personnel required for safe administration.
Long- term safety profile in TRD not established  
(e.g., abuse liability, gateway activity).
Esketamine Acute and maintenance efficacy established in TRD.
Beneficial effects on suicidality.
Rapid onset of symptomatic improvement.
Superiority to SGA (i.e., quetiapine XR) in acute and 
maintenance treatment of TRD.Access to treatment limited in many jurisdictions.
Acquisition cost.
Recommendation to co- prescribe with underlying 
antidepressant in TRD.
Second- generation antipsychotics 
(SGAs)Scalable and accessible treatments.
Evidence established for olanzapine- fluoxetine 
combination.With exception of olanzapine- fluoxetine combination, 
studied in partial responders rather than TRD.
Short-  and long- term tolerability concerns.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) Highly effective in acute and maintenance treatment of 
TRD.
Non-inferiority to IV ketamine suggested by available 
evidence.
Efficacy in TRD across the age span.Relative lack of availability in many contexts.
Stigma and lack of acceptability to many patients with 
TRD.
Tolerability concerns (e.g., memory deficits).
Repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulationShown to be effective in TRD.
More acceptable to patients than ECT.
Accelerated protocol demonstrates significant remission 
rates within one week.
Tolerability advantages compared to ECT  
(i.e., persisting cognitive deficits not observed).Relative lack of availability in many jurisdictions.
Inferiority to ECT in TRD with non- accelerated 
protocols.
Insufficient long- term data in TRD.
Vagus nerve stimulation Proven efficacy in TRD in persons with extensive 
antidepressant failure histories.
Treatment does not need to be administered on a daily 
basis.Not available in most countries globally.
Complexity of procedure limits scalability.
Complications of implant.
Cost of treatment.
Psychotherapies Evidence supports efficacy when used adjunctively in TRD.
Opportunity to target comorbidities.
Facilitate coping strategies with improved effects on patient- 
reported outcomes.
Highly acceptable to persons with lived experience of TRD.
Opportunity to tailor treatment targeting specific 
therapeutic outcomes.Lack of availability of treatment or adequately trained 
providers.
Low adherence to therapy.
Lack of evidence as standalone treatment in TRD.
402 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023
individuals with MDD exhibiting partial re-
sponse to an index antidepressant.
Extending the antidepressant trial
As mentioned earlier, results from the 
STAR *D trial indicated that a proportion of  
individuals who responded to level 1 treat -
ment did so after week 6. A systematic review  
of available studies sought to evaluate the 
likelihood of response during weeks 5- 8 and  
9- 12 in individuals with MDD not respond-
ing after four weeks178. It was concluded that  
approximately 20% of patients with MDD not 
responding in the first four weeks respond ed 
during weeks 5-  8, while approximately 10% 
responded during weeks 9- 12 178.
However, it is not established that extend-
ing an antidepressant trial in patients defined 
as having TRD results in any considerable 
likelihood of treatment success. In addition, 
persons with lived depression experience 
prioritize rapidity of antidepressant action, 
so that prolonging antidepressant trials for 
an additional one to two months is unlikely 
to be acceptable in most cases of  TRD92.
Switching antidepressants
Meta- analytic data are conflicting as to  
whether switching antidepressants increas -
es the likelihood of response in TRD179,180. 
A related but separate concept that would 
justify switching class of antidepressants is  
that of “broadening the spectrum of efficacy” . 
For example, a patient prescribed an SSRI 
who continues to manifest debilitating anhe-
donia, fatigue, and psychomotor retardation 
may exhibit significant improvement when 
switching to an antidepressant with a differ -
ent mechanism of action181,182.
Overall, switching antidepressants may 
be considered in some cases of TRD, and the  
new agent should be a “non- classmate” an -
tidepressant.
Combining antidepressants
Persons with TRD are commonly treat -
ed with antidepressant polypharmacy, but 
few relevant studies have been conducted 
specifically in populations with TRD183- 187.Results from a meta- analysis have sup-
ported the efficacy of adding mirtazapine or 
bupropion in persons with “early-  stage” TRD 
(i.e., non- response to one adequate pharma -
cological or psychological therapy for de-
pression)188. As mentioned earlier, level 2 
treatment (i.e., TRD) from the STAR* D trial 
included seven possible switch/augmenta-
tion strategies in adults with non-  psychotic 
depression not achieving remission with ci-   
 talopram. The three augmentation approach-
es were bupropion, buspirone, and cogni tive  
therapy. The proportion of patients achieving 
remission after receiving bupropion combin  ed  
with citalopram was 39.0%, compared to 
25.5% when switching to bupropion sustain -
ed release (SR) monotherapy33.
A recent meta- analysis concluded that 
alpha- 2 autoreceptor antagonists (i.e., mir -
tazapine, mianserin, trazodone) combined 
with SSRIs are superior to monotherapy in 
mixed populations including TRD, but the 
composition of the patient samples studied 
precludes any definite interpretation of the 
finding189.
Overall, data supporting the combination 
of antidepressants as an efficacious treatment 
strategy is modest in TRD populations.
Ketamine/esketamine
Intravenous (IV) racemic ketamine has 
been found to rapidly improve depressive  
symptoms and suicidal ideation in adults  
with TRD, and its efficacy has been con-
firmed in real- world patient samples. Clin-
ically mean  ingful benefit has been observed  
in both single and multiple infusion studies  
190- 193. Intranasal esketamine spray co- initi-
ated with an antidepressant has also demon-
strated rapid clinically meaningful efficacy 
in patients with TRD. Unlike IV ketamine, 
there are also data demonstrating long- term  
(i.e., greater than 3- year) safety and toler -
ability for esketamine194,195.
Item analysis indicates that ketamine and  
esketamine not only significantly improve 
overall symptoms of TRD, but also specific  
depressive symptoms that are over- repre-
sented in adults with TRD, such as anhedo-
nia196- 199. Meta- analytic data also indicate 
that glutamatergic treatment strategies may 
be superior to antipsychotic agents in adults 
with TRD200,201.In 2019, the FDA approved intranasal es -
ketamine spray combined with antidepres -
sants in adults with TRD, with subsequent 
approvals by other regulators globally (e.g., 
EMA). Less evidence is available for ketamine 
and/or its derivatives delivered through other 
routes of administration191. Moreover, the 
concomitant administration of ketamine and  
psychological interventions (“ketamine- as-
sisted” therapy) is insufficiently character -
ized and as such cannot be recommended  
for TRD202.
Results from the recent ES   CAPE-   TRD trial  
indicate that intranasal esketamine com  -
bined with an antidepressant is significant-  
ly more effective than quetia  pine XR in TRD, 
with a remission rate at week 8 of 27.1% vs. 
17.6% (p=0.003)203. Remission rates contin-
ued to increase in both arms after the pri-
mary endpoint, with a significantly greater 
proportion of patients in remission at week 
32 in the intranasal esketamine than in 
the quetiapine XR arm (55% vs. 37%, p<  
0.001)203.
Preliminary evidence indicates that the 
 effectiveness of IV ketamine in individuals 
with TRD and history of non- response to 
neurostimulation (i.e., ECT or rTMS) is not re-
duced as compared to individuals with TRD 
and no prior neurostimulation treatment204. 
Available evidence also indicates that the ef -
ficacy of ketamine/esketamine in the acute  
treat  ment of TRD is also apparent in indi-
viduals with greater de  grees of antidepres -
sant resistance205.
Safety concerns attributable to long- term 
ketamine/esketamine exposure include po-
tential for abuse and misuse, tolerance and 
withdrawal, effects on liver function, and 
possibly kidney and/or urogenital toxic -
ity206. The risks for the foregoing safety con-
cerns would be expected to be mitigated 
when administering ketamine/esketamine 
under medical supervision in accordance 
with best practices205.
Second- generation antipsychotics
The only SGA evaluated in patients fail  -  
ing two or more prior antidepressant treat  -  
ments (i.e., TRD) is the fixed dose olanzapine-  
flu oxetine combination207- 209. The other SGAs 
assessed in MDD (i.e., aripiprazole, brexpip -
razole, cariprazine, risperidone and quetia -
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 403
pine XR) have been studied only in pa -
tients with a partial response to at least 
one anti depressant187,201,210- 224.
Head- to- head comparisons of SGAs as 
augmentation in TRD are not available, nor 
are long- term recurrence prevention data. 
The absence of long- term data with SGAs is 
a point of differentiation with esketamine, 
which has long- term multi- year establish-
ment of efficacy and safety195. Limitations 
of longer- term use of SGAs in MDD relate 
to tolerability and safety concerns (e.g., met -
abolic dysregulation, weight gain, and ex -
trapyramidal adverse effects)225.
Relatively few studies have compared the  
antipsychotic augmentation of antidepres -
sants versus the combination of antidepres -
sants in patients presenting with suboptimal  
antidepressant response. The VA Augmen-
tation and Switching Treatments for Im-
proving Depression Outcomes (VAST- D) tri-
al was a multisite randomized, single- blind,  
parallel- assignment trial of depression un-
responsive to at least one course of antide -
pressant treatment226. Eligible subjects were 
randomly assigned to one of three treat -
ments: switch to bupropion SR, augmenta-
tion of current treatment with bupropion SR, 
or augmentation of current treatment with 
aripiprazole. The remission rate at week 12 
was higher for the aripiprazole group (28.9%) 
compared with the switch to bupropion SR 
group (22.3%), but not with the bupropion 
SR add- on group (26.9%). Response rates 
were significantly higher for the aripipra-
zole group (74.3%) than for both bupropion 
SR monotherapy and bupropion SR aug-
mentation groups (62.4% and 65.6%, re-
spectively)226.
The VAST- D trial results replicate and ex -
tend the efficacy and tolerability of SGAs in 
individuals with MDD partially responding 
to antidepressants. As mentioned earlier, 
there are insufficient data for SGAs in TRD. 
However, results of the ESCAPE-  TRD trial sug -
gest superiority of intranasal esketamine to 
quetiapine XR.
Neurostimulation
Neurostimulatory treatments evaluated in 
TRD include vagus nerve stimulation (VNS),  
ECT, rTMS, magnetic seizure therapy, deep 
brain stimulation, and transcranial direct current stimulation227- 233.
VNS has proven to be efficacious in pa-
tients with higher- order TRD (i.e., equal or 
greater than four prior antidepressants), and  
has also demonstrated durability of eff  ect 
with maintenance treatment234- 236. The FDA  
has approved VNS in TRD patients with a his -
tory of at least four prior failed antidepres -
sants.
ECT is a well- established therapeutic in-
tervention in the treatment of TRD, with an 
average open- label remission rate of 48% in  
non-  psychotic depression237. Efficacy may  
be higher in individuals with psychotic de-
pression. Many modifications to the imple-
mentation of ECT have retained efficacy in 
TRD with improved tolerability profile (e.g., 
bilateral brief pulse ECT vs. right unilateral 
ultra- brief pulse ECT)238.
Results from systematic reviews and me-
ta-analyses consistently support the efficacy 
of rTMS in TRD233. Results also indicate that 
greater severity at baseline and higher num-
ber of prior antidepressant failures are asso-
ciated with attenuated rTMS efficacy239- 243. 
The cost- effectiveness of rTMS in adults with  
TRD is well established, and possibly higher 
compared to ECT, but available evidence 
also shows that ECT may be more effective 
than conventional rTMS in the acute and re-
currence prevention treatment of TRD 244- 246.
Newer forms of rTMS are being validated,  
including conventional intermittent theta 
burst stimulation (iTBS), whose efficacy in 
adults with TRD when compared to sham  
treatment is well established247,248. An accel-
erated high- dose iTBS protocol with mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI)- guided func -
tional connectivity targeting (Stanford neuro-
modulation therapy, SNT) has been found, 
in a double- blind randomized controlled tri -
al (RCT), to be significantly superior relative 
to sham treatment four weeks after the end 
of the five- day protocol. The significant ben-
efit observed was evident despite an average  
of five prior antidepressant medication trials  
249. The SNT approach was recently cleared 
by the FDA for TRD.
In addition, results from RCTs have sup-
ported the efficacy of magnetic seizure ther -
apy, with additional evidence demonstrat -
ing continuation of effect250,251. A Cochrane  
review did not identify a significant differ -
ence between this therapy and ECT in adults  
with TRD252.Results of RCTs have not documented  
the efficacy of deep brain stimulation, when 
com  pared to sham treatment, in TRD253- 257.  
Transcranial direct current stimulation is as -
sociated with variable outcomes across RCTs  
in the treatment of adults with TRD: the het -
erogeneity in response may be due to the 
broad range of treatment resistance included  
in the original trials, from treatment- naïve 
to ECT failing individuals258.
In summary, of the foregoing neurostim-
ulation modalities, ECT, rTMS, VNS and 
SNT are recommended in adults with TRD. 
Although there is a lack of head- to- head com-
parator data of proven treatments in TRD, 
preliminary evidence suggests that ECT may  
be non-inferior when compared to IV ra-
cemic ketamine in adults with TRD259.
Psychotherapeutic interventions
There are multiple reasons for consid-
ering psychotherapeutic interventions in 
persons with TRD. For example, evidence 
indicates that these interventions are a pre-
ferred treatment option over pharmaco-
therapy amongst persons with lived depres -
sion experience73,260,261. Residual symptoms 
and comorbidities in persons with TRD are 
frequently amenable to psychological treat -
ments. Psychotherapies, when combined 
with pharmacological treatments, are con-
ceptually supported insofar as they facilitate 
learning, coping and resilience mechanisms  
that synergize with the hypothesized bio-
logical mechanisms of action of antidepres -
sants262. Finally, individuals with persistent 
depression and history of trauma, both of 
which are more common in TRD popula-
tions, exhibit significant response rates with 
psychological interventions263,264.
Notwithstanding the rationale for use of 
psychotherapies in TRD, data supporting 
them as standalone interventions in TRD 
are limited265,266. Available evidence does, 
however, support the efficacy of adjunctive 
psychological interventions in persons with 
TRD267- 271.
The psychotherapeutic modalities most  
frequently investigated include cognitive be -
havioral therapy (CBT), interpersonal psy-
chotherapy, and mindfulness- based cog-
nitive therapy272. Meta- analytic data have de-
termined that psychotherapy added to on-
404 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023
going treat ment as usual (TAU) had a mod-
erate and significant effect size (Hedges’ g=  
0.42) in comparison with TAU alone in TRD  
272.
Overall, the available evidence indicates 
that manual- based psychotherapies are ef -
fective in persons with TRD when combined 
with antidepressants. There is insufficient ev -
idence about combining these interventions  
in persons with a higher number of prior an-
tidepressant failures and/or ECT non-  re-
sponse. Patient preference, potential for scal -
ability with digital solutions, and efficacy in 
the treatment of comorbidities (e.g., anxiety 
disorders) are additional rationales for con-
sidering psychotherapies in patients with 
TRD. Preliminary evidence suggests that CBT  
may be capable of prolonging the effect ob-
served in adults with TRD who acutely ben-
efited from ketamine treatment202.
However, a recent European study that 
rigorously defined TRD failed to demon-
strate the efficacy of adjunctive psycholog-
ical treatment266. It may be surmised that 
patient characteristics and the type of psy-
chological intervention are critical moder -
ators of efficacy in TRD populations.
INVESTIGATIONAL 
INTERVENTIONS IN 
TREATMENT-RESISTANT 
DEPRESSION
The public health implications of TRD 
provide the impetus for the development of 
new interventions specifically for this sub-
population. It is noteworthy that enrollment 
in most clinical trials of investigational agents 
in MDD exclude patients with TRD, espe-
cially those with a high number of failed prior 
antidepressant trials in the current episode, 
or those who have failed ECT or IV ketamine 
in this episode.
The class of agents imprecisely referred 
to as psychedelics has received the most at -
tention as a potential investigational inter -
vention in TRD273. Preliminary evidence sug-    
gests that psilocybin, combined with psy  cho-    
therapy, may offer rapid and possibly sus  -
tained symptom relief in adults with TRD. 
For example, a phase 2 double- blind trial 
randomly assigned adults with TRD to re-
ceive a single dose of psilocybin 25 mg, 10 
mg or 1 mg (control) along with psychologi-cal support274. All persons had failed at least  
two prior treatments before enrollment. Par -
ticipants receiving the 25 mg dose, but not  
the 10 mg dose, exhibited a significantly great -
er least-  squares mean change from baseline 
to week 3 compared with the 1 mg dose. The 
response and remission rates for the partici-
pants receiving the 25 mg dose were 37% and 
29%, respectively274.
Several methodological problems affect 
available controlled trials with psilocybin in 
TRD. Aspects of unblinding as well as expec -
tancy are undoubtedly contributing to the 
observed effects, as are the psychotherapeu-
tic modalities that are considered integral to 
the process of taking psychedelics. Neverthe-
less, the results of available RCTs with psilocy-
bin have provided the impetus for evaluating 
this drug in phase 3 pivotal trials for TRD275. 
Deconstructing the contribution of psycho-
therapy from the psychedelic intervention 
will be an inexact yet necessary endeavor in  
order to interpret study findings and provide 
appropriate treatment and implementation 
recommendations. Moreover, the psycho -
therapy that is currently combined with psy -
chedelics does not have a standardized evi-
dence- based protocol.
Additional investigational interventions  
in TRD include lithium, thyroid hormone,  
buspirone, L- methylfolate, S- adenosylme -
thionine, anti- inflammatory agents (e.g., 
COX- 2 inhibitors, minocycline, statins, and  
tumor necrosis factor-  alpha antagonists), 
zuranolone and dextromethorphan- bupro-
pion combination276- 280. The extant evidence 
supporting lithium and thyroid hormone 
largely refers to their combination with TCAs 
and MAOIs in patients with partial response  
to these agents. Medications that have been 
studied in TRD and demonstrated not to 
be efficacious are pindolol and buprenor -
phine281,282.
Despite the widespread prescription of 
multiple psychotropic agents off- label in 
patients with TRD, there are no rigorous 
studies with large samples establishing the 
efficacy of any of the foregoing strategies.
CONCLUSIONS
Amongst individuals meeting criteria for  
MDD with access to high- quality mea sure -
ment- based care, at least 30% will meet criteria for TRD. This estimate is derived from effi -
cacy and/or effectiveness research find  ings.  
The prevalence of TRD in real world practice 
is not known, but would be expected to be  
higher, due to knowledge- implementation  
gaps, barriers to access, and illness presen -
tation complexity283.
With respect to illness presentation com-
plexity, most individuals with TRD encoun-
tered in clinical practice would not be eligi-
ble for most clinical research studies, on the 
basis of illness characteristics (e.g., severity, 
number of prior episodes, suicidality), co-
morbidity and treatment history13,284.
Multiple definitions of TRD have been 
proposed and are reviewed herein. The lack 
of a universal definition of TRD is a barrier 
to advancing mechanistic and translational 
research, as well as to identifying innova-
tive and precision- based therapeutics. In 
addition, public policy decisions, as well as 
clinical decision- making, would be bene-
fited by a more precise and valid definition 
of TRD. For example, considerations for re-
imbursement in TRD which are critical for 
access to treatment are limited by the fact 
that multiple definitions of this condition 
exist. Hence, decisions by policy makers 
on whether to include treatments for TRD 
as part of a reimbursement schedule are 
highly variable across jurisdictions. From a 
clinical perspective, the lack of a universal 
definition of TRD contributes to heteroge-
neity in treatment selection and sequenc -
ing. This heterogeneity is also reflected in 
clinical practice guidelines for MDD, that 
have different recommendations with re-
spect to selection and sequencing of treat -
ments for adults with TRD.
Consensus exists that the lack of a clinical-    
 ly meaningful improvement with a minimum 
of two antidepressants should be re tain ed in 
any working definition of TRD. A quantifiable 
endpoint defining non- response should be 
provided. A comprehensive and conceptual -
ly valid definition of TRD with clinical utility 
should also include aspects of patient-  re-
ported outcomes, psychosocial func  tion, as 
well as dimensional outcomes (e.g., anhe -
donia)285.
The related, but separate, notion of DTD 
seems more aligned with the realities of the 
clinical ecosystem, and with patient experi -
ence of depression and sequential non- re-
sponse to treatments94,286. A compelling case 
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 405
is made that TRD is potentially judgmental 
insofar as it may be interpreted as blaming  
the patient. Instead, DTD is agnostic and rep-
resents a patient- centered and pragmatic ap-
proach to identifying therapeutic targets84. 
The construct of DTD could serve as a useful 
framework informing further characteriza -
tion of TRD.
The variability in antidepressant response  
is widely recognized287. A confluence of socio-
demographic and clinical characteristics is 
known to moderate this response. Clinicians 
are encouraged to identify modifiable factors 
that attenuate antidepressant outcomes and 
allocate resources to these factors in patients 
prescribed antidepressants. For example, 
non- adherence, illness and treat ment illiter -
acy, stigma, and attitude towards treatment 
are modifiable with psychoeducation efforts 
and possibly peer-  support73.
In addition, psychiatric and physical co-
morbidities not only attenuate antidepres -
sant response but may also be a consequence 
of TRD. Targeting comorbidities at the same  
time as depressive symptoms would be pre-
dicted to improve treatment outcomes as 
well as reduce cost and health resource uti-
lization in adults with MDD. In addition, 
closing the implementation- knowledge gap  
with fidelity to evidence- based treatments 
is a near- term cost- effective priority in the 
management of MDD today.
The evidence supports select SGAs, as 
well as rTMS and manual- based psychother -
apies (in combination), as proven strategies 
in adults who have failed one prior antide-
pressant. For individuals with TRD (failing 
multiple antidepressants), evidence is best 
for ketamine, esketamine, adjunctive psy-
chotherapy, ECT and rTMS. Psychothera -
peutic interventions in combination with an-
tidepressants may offer partial symptomatic 
relief in persons with TRD, but their efficacy 
as monotherapy is not established. Combi-
nation antidepressants, switching antide-
pressant treatment, dose optimization and 
the use of a host of augmentation strategies 
(e.g., lithium, thyroid hormone) have mixed 
data supporting their usefulness288.
Intranasal esketamine combined with an 
antidepressant is the most rigorously eval-
uated pharmacologic strategy in the acute 
and maintenance treatment of adults with 
TRD. In addition to demonstrating acute ef -
ficacy, it has established relapse prevention, tolerability and safety in persons with TRD, 
with more than three years of maintenance 
data. IV racemic ketamine has also demon-
strated robust rapid antidepressant efficacy  
in mostly acute studies. There are relatively  
few controlled studies, however, that have  
documented maintenance efficacy of re-
peat- dose IV ketamine in adults with TRD  
289.
The relative efficacy of intranasal esketa -
mine to ECT in TRD is unknown, but is cur -
rently being evaluated. Preliminary evidence  
suggests that ECT may be non-inferior to IV 
race  mic ketamine in the acute treatment 
of TRD 259. Results from large and rigorous 
controlled studies comparing IV ketamine 
to ECT are expected to provide further deci -
sion support and inform recommendations 
for treatment sequencing in TRD259.
The investigational interventions in TRD  
that have received the most research, media  
and public attention have been psychedelics.  
Available evidence for psilocybin suggests 
acute efficacy that is rapid and sustained in  
well- characterized samples of persons with 
TRD. Unanswered questions as to the con-
tribution of integrated psychotherapy in 
 per sons receiving psilocybin have not only 
 conceptual and clinical relevance, but are 
also critical to address from an implemen -
tation perspective.
Future research vistas with respect to phar -
macological treatment are testing whether 
ketamine derivatives or other glutamatergic 
agents may be useful in TRD. Additionally, 
GABAergic agents (e.g., zuranolone), opioid 
receptor modulators, orexin antagonists, 
voltage- gated ion channels modulators, anti-  
inflammatories, as well as agents targeting 
cellular metabolic processes are also under 
investigation in TRD290.
It is recognized that TRD is an under- re-
searched clinical population with dispro-
portionate morbidity and mortality. Mech-
anistically novel interventions that offer 
mean ingful benefit may be eligible for FDA 
“breakthrough status” , incentivizing treat -
ment discovery and development in this 
area.
Identifying biomarkers and biosignatures  
associated with TRD is an important future 
research vista. As reviewed herein, pharma-
cogenomic testing has preliminary support 
as a tactic in assessing TRD patients, espe-
cially in cases of medication poor tolerabil-ity. Notwithstanding, it cannot be recom-
mended as a routine assessment in all per -
sons presenting with TRD. It is anticipated 
that pharmacogenomics will advance, as will 
the ability to computationally interrogate 
multi- omic data, providing insights into the 
neurobiology of TRD and also potentially in-
forming patient stratification and precision 
therapeutics with clinical ecosystem appli-
cation potential.
Digital psychiatry encompasses aspects 
of health care delivery, illness surveillance, 
disease management and treatment291- 294. 
Multiple proprietary and academically led 
product developments are underway to iden-
tify digital therapeutics that may have appli-
cation in TRD populations.
The next decade can reasonably expect 
the regulatory approval of innovative phar -
macological treatments targeting systems 
implicated in the pathophysiology of depres -
sion. The foregoing, along with advances in 
the digital delivery of psychological interven-
tions and refinement of parameters of neuro-
stimulation (notably rTMS with accelerated 
protocols), hold promise to improve general 
health outcomes and cost- effectiveness of 
care in TRD.
The extraordinary public health burden 
of TRD will unlikely be extinguished in the 
near future, but the proportion of individu-
als with debilitating symptoms of depres -
sion and dissatisfaction with treatment may 
be reasonably expected to be decreased with 
successful targeting of modifiable factors, re-
ducing the knowledge- implementation gap, 
and rapid adoption of innovations across 
therapeutic modalities.
REFERENCES
1. Herrman H, Patel V , Kieling C et al. Time for unit -
ed action on depression: a Lancet- World Psychi-
atric Association Commission. Lancet 2022;399:  
957- 1022.
2. GBD 2019 Diseases and Injuries Collaborators. 
Global burden of 369 diseases and injuries in 204 
countries and territories, 1990- 2019: a systematic 
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 
2019. Lancet 2020;396:1204- 22.
3. Goldberg JF , Nasrallah HA. Major depression is a 
serious and potentially fatal brain syndrome re -
quiring pharmacotherapy or neuromodulation, 
and psychotherapy. Psychol Med 2022;52:1423- 5.
4. Reynolds CF 3rd, Jeste DV , Sachdev PS et al. Men-
tal health care for older adults: recent advances 
and new directions in clinical practice and re-
search. World Psychiatry 2022;21:336- 63.
5. Pérez-  Sola V , Roca M, Alonso J et al. Economic 
impact of treatment- resistant depression: a retro-
406 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023
spective observational study. J Affect Disord 2021;  
295:578- 86.
6. World Health Organization. Depression and 
oth er common mental disorders: global health 
esti mates. Geneva: World Health Organization,  
2017.
7. Santomauro DF , Mantilla Herrera AM, Shadid J 
et al. Global prevalence and burden of depressive 
and anxiety disorders in 204 countries and ter -
ritories in 2020 due to the COVID- 19 pandemic. 
Lancet 2021;398:1700- 12.
8. Xiong J, Lipsitz O, Nasri F et al. Impact of COVID-
 19 pandemic on mental health in the general pop-
ulation: a systematic review. J Affect Disord 2020;  
277:55- 64.
9. Rush AJ, Sackeim HA, Conway CR et al. Research  
challenges in chronic diseases: difficult to treat de-
pression. Brain Stimul 2021;14:1708- 52.
10. McIntyre RS, Filteau MJ, Martin L et al. Treat ment-  
resistant depression: definitions, review of the evi -
dence, and algorithmic approach. J Affect Disord 
2014;156:1- 7.
11. Brown S, Rittenbach K, Cheung S et al. Current 
and common definitions of treatment- resistant 
depres  sion: findings from a systematic review 
and qualitative interviews. Can J Psychiatry 
2019;64:380- 7.
12. Henssler J, Kurschus M, Franklin J et al. Long- term 
acute-  phase treatment with antidepressants, 8  
weeks and beyond: a systematic review and meta-  
analysis of randomized, placebo-controlled tri-
als. J Clin Psychiatry 2018;79:15r10545.
13. Maj M, Stein DJ, Parker G et al. The clinical char -
acterization of the adult patient with depression 
aimed at personalization of management. World 
Psychiatry 2020;19:269- 93.
14. Bartova L, Dold M, Kautzky A et al. Results of 
the European Group for the Study of Resistant 
Depression (GSRD) –  basis for further research 
and clinical practice. World J Biol Psychiatry 
2019;20:427- 48.
15. Vieta E, Alonso J, Pérez-  Sola V et al. Epidemiol -
ogy and costs of depressive disorder in Spain: the  
EPICO study. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2021;  
50:93- 103.
16. Kasper S. Is treatment-  resistant depression really  
resistant? Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2022;58:  
44- 6.
17. Zhdanava M, Pilon D, Ghelerter I et al. The pre-
valence and national burden of treatment- re-
sistant depression and major depressive disorder  
in the United States. J Clin Psychiatry 2021;82:  
20m13699.
18. Souery D, Oswald P , Massat I et al. Clinical factors 
associated with treatment resistance in major de-
pressive disorder: results from a European multi-
center study. J Clin Psychiatry 2007;68:1062- 70.
19. Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. GBD 
results. http://ghdx.healt hdata.org .
20. McIntyre RS, Prieto R, Schepman P et al. Health -
care resource use and cost associated with timing 
of pharmacological treatment for major depres -
sive disorder in the United States: a real-  world 
study. Curr Med Res Opin 2019;35:2169- 77.
21. McIntyre RS, Millson B, Power GS. Burden of 
treatment resistant depression (TRD) in patients 
with major depressive disorder in Ontario using 
Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences (ICES) 
databases: economic burden and healthcare re-
source utilization. J Affect Disord 2020;277:30- 8.
22. Sussman M, O’sullivan AK, Shah A et al. Eco-
nomic burden of treatment- resistant depression 
on the U.S. health care system. J Manag Care Spec Pharm 2019;25:823- 35.
23. Jensen KJ, Gronemann FH, Ankarfeldt MZ et al. 
Healthcare resource utilization in patients with 
treatment-  resistant depression –   A Danish na -
tional registry study. PLoS One 2022;17:e0275299.
24. Heerlein K, De Giorgi S, Degraeve G et al. Real-  
world evidence from a European cohort study of  
pa tients with treatment resistant depression: health-
care resource utilization. J Affect Disord 2022;298:  
442- 50.
25. Rathod S, Denee T, Eva J et al. Health- related qual -
ity of life burden associated with treatment- resist -
ant depression in UK patients: quantitative results  
from a mixed- methods non- interventional study.  
J Affect Disord 2022;300:551- 62.
26. Gillain B, Degraeve G, Dreesen T et al. Real- world  
treatment patterns, outcomes, resource utilization  
and costs in treatment- resistant major depressive 
disorder: PATTERN, a retrospective cohort study 
in Belgium. Pharmacoecon Open 2022;6:293-  
302.
27. Perrone V , Sangiorgi D, Andretta M et al. Health-
care resource consumption and related costs of 
pa tients estimated with treatment- resistant de-
pression in Italy. Clinicoecon Outcomes Res 2021;  
13:629- 35.
28. Lynch FL, Dickerson JF , O’Keeffe- Rosetti M et al. 
Understanding the relationship between depres -
sion symptom severity and health care costs for 
patients with treatment- resistant depression. J 
Clin Psychiatry 2022;83:21m13976.
29. Olfson M, Amos TB, Benson C et al. Prospective 
service use and health care costs of Medicaid ben-
eficiaries with treatment- resistant depression. J 
Manag Care Spec Pharm 2018;24:226- 36.
30. Gaynes BN, Asher G, Gartlehner G et al. Defini-
tion of treatment- resistant depression in the Medi-
care population. Rockville: Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality, 2018.
31. Wiles NJ, Thomas L, Turner N et al. Long- term 
effectiveness and cost- effectiveness of cognitive 
behavioural therapy as an adjunct to pharmaco-
therapy for treatment- resistant depression in pri-
mary care: follow- up of the CoBalT randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet Psychiatry 2016;3:137- 44.
32. Nemeroff CB. Prevalence and management of 
treatment- resistant depression. J Clin Psychiatry 
2007;68(Suppl. 8):17- 25.
33. Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR et al. Acute 
and longer- term outcomes in depressed outpa-
tients requiring one or several treatment steps: a 
STAR*D report. Am J Psychiatry 2006;163:1905- 17.
34. Chan VK, Cheung EC, Chan SS et al. Mortality-  
causing mechanisms and healthcare resource 
utilisation of treatment- resistant depression: a 
six- year population- based cohort study. Lancet 
Reg Health West Pac 2022;22:100426.
35. Denee T, Kerr C, Eva J et al. The impact of treat -
ment- resistant depression on the lives of carers:  
a mixed- methods study. J Affect Disord 2022;  
325:194- 205.
36. Mann JJ, Michel CA, Auerbach RP . Improving 
 suicide prevention through evidence- based strat -
egies: a systematic review. Am J Psychiatry 2021;  
178:611- 24.
37. Brydges CR, Bhattacharyya S, Dehkordi SM et 
al. Metabolomic and inflammatory signatures of 
symptom dimensions in major depression. Brain 
Behav Immun 2022;102:42- 52.
38. McIntyre RS. Surrogate markers of insulin resis -
tance in predicting major depressive disorder: 
meta  bolism metastasizes to the brain. Am J Psy-
chiatry 2021;178:885- 7.39. Armbrecht E, Shah R, Poorman GW et al. Eco-
nomic and humanistic burden associated with 
de pression and anxiety among adults with non-  
communicable chronic diseases (NCCDs) in the 
United States. J Multidiscip Healthc 2021;14:887-  
96.
40. McIntyre RS, Soczynska JK, Konarski JZ et al. 
Should depressive syndromes be reclassified as 
“metabolic syndrome type II”? Ann Clin Psychia-
try 2007;19:257- 64.
41. McIntyre RS, Rosenbluth M, Ramasubbu R et al. 
Managing medical and psychiatric comorbidity  
in individuals with major depressive disorder and  
bipolar disorder. Ann Clin Psychiatry 2012;24:  163-  
9.
42. Lee Y, Brietzke E, Cao B et al. Development and 
implementation of guidelines for the management 
of depression: a systematic review. Bull World 
Health Organ 2020;98:683- 97H.
43. Cleare A, Pariante CM, Young AH et al. Evidence-  
based guidelines for treating depressive disorders 
with antidepressants: a revision of the 2008 British  
Association for Psychopharmacology guidelines. 
J Psychopharmacol 2015;29:459- 525.
44. Kennedy SH, Lam RW, McIntyre RS et al. Cana-
dian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments 
(CANMAT) 2016 clinical guidelines for the man-
agement of adults with major depressive disor -
der: Section 3. Pharmacological treatments. Can 
J Psychiatry 2016;61:540- 60.
45. Bauer M, Severus E, Möller HJ et al. Pharmacolog-
ical treatment of unipolar depressive disorders:  
summary of WFSBP guidelines. Int J Psychiatry 
Clin Pract 2017;21:166- 76.
46. Nutt DJ, Davidson JRT, Gelenberg AJ et al. Inter -
national consensus statement on major depres -
sive disorder. J Clin Psychiatry 2010;71(Suppl. E1):   
e08.
47. McIntyre RS, Suppes T, Tandon R et al. Florida 
best practice psychotherapeutic medication guide -
lines for adults with major depressive disorder. 
J Clin Psychiatry 2017;78:703- 13.
48. National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. 
Depression in adults: treatment and management. 
https://www.nice.org.uk .
49. Insel TR. The NIMH Research Domain Criteria 
(RDoC) project: precision medicine for psychia-
try. Am J Psychiatry 2014;171:395- 7.
50. McIntyre RS, Alda M, Baldessarini RJ et al. The 
clinical characterization of the adult patient with 
bipolar disorder aimed at personalization of man -
agement. World Psychiatry 2022;21:364- 87.
51. Stein DJ, Shoptaw SJ, Vigo DV et al. Psychiatric di-
agnosis and treatment in the 21st century: para-
digm shifts versus incremental integration. World 
Psychiatry 2022;21:393- 414.
52. U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Center for 
Drug Evaluation and Research. Major depressive 
disorder: developing drugs for treatment. Silver 
Spring: U.S. Food and Drug Administration, 2018.
53. European Medicines Agency. Clinical investiga-
tion of medicinal products in the treatment of 
depression –  Scientific guideline. Amsterdam: 
European Medicines Agency, 2018.
54. Thase ME, Rush AJ. When at first you don’t suc -
ceed: sequential strategies for antidepressant non-
responders. J Clin Psychiatry 1997;58(Suppl. 13):  
23- 9.
55. Thase ME, Rush AJ. Treatment resistant depres -
sion. In: Bloom FE, Kupfer DJ (eds). Psycho-
pharmacology: the fourth generation of progress. 
New York: Raven Press, 1995:1081- 97.
56. Fekadu A, Donocik JG, Cleare AJ. Standardisation 
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 407
framework for the Maudsley staging method for 
treatment resistance in depression. BMC Psychi -
atry 2018;18:100.
57. Fekadu A, Wooderson SC, Markopoulou K et al. 
The Maudsley Staging Method for treatment- re-
sistant depression: prediction of longer- term out -
come and persistence of symptoms. J Clin Psychia -
try 2009;70:952- 7.
58. Fekadu A, Rane LJ, Wooderson SC et al. Predic -
tion of longer- term outcome of treatment- resis -
tant depression in tertiary care. Br J Psychiatry 2012;  
201:369- 75.
59. Hamilton M. A rating scale for depression. J Neu-
rol Neurosurg Psychiatry 1960;23:56- 62.
60. Montgomery SA, Åsberg M. A new depression 
scale designed to be sensitive to change. Br J Psy-
chiatry 1979;134:382- 9.
61. Peeters FPML, Ruhe HG, Wichers M et al. The 
Dutch Measure for quantification of Treatment 
Resistance in Depression (DM-  TRD): an extension 
of the Maudsley Staging Method. J Affect Disord 
2016;205:365- 71.
62. Fava M. Diagnosis and definition of treatment-  
resistant depression. Biol Psychiatry 2003;53:649-  
59.
63. Sforzini L, Worrell C, Kose M et al. A Delphi- meth -
od- based consensus guideline for definition of 
treatment- resistant depression for clinical trials. 
Mol Psychiatry 2022;27:1286- 99.
64. Demyttenaere K, Van Duppen Z. The impact of 
(the concept of) treatment- resistant depression:  
an opinion review. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 
2019;  22:85- 92.
65. Trevino K, McClintock SM, McDonald Fischer N 
et al. Defining treatment- resistant depression: a 
comprehensive review of the literature. Ann Clin 
Psychiatry 2014;26:222- 32.
66. Conway CR, George MS, Sackeim HA. Toward 
an evidence- based, operational definition of 
treat  ment-resistant depression: when enough is e -
nough. JAMA Psychiatry 2017;74:9- 10.
67. McAllister- Williams RH, Christmas DMB, Cleare 
AJ et al. Multiple- therapy- resistant major depres -
sive disorder: a clinically important concept. Br J 
Psychiatry 2018;212:274- 8.
68. Gabriel FC, Stein AT, de Melo DO et al. Quality 
of clinical practice guidelines for inadequate re-
sponse to first- line treatment for depression ac -
cording to AGREE II checklist and comparison 
of recommendations: a systematic review. BMJ 
Open 2022;12:e051918.
69. McIntyre RS, O’Donovan C. The human cost of 
not achieving full remission in depression. Can J 
Psychiatry 2004;49(Suppl. 1):10- 16S.
70. Rush AJ, Aaronson ST, Demyttenaere K. Difficult-  
to- treat depression: a clinical and research road-
map for when remission is elusive. Aust N Z J Psy -
chiatry 2019;53:109- 18.
71. Nierenberg AA, Husain MM, Trivedi MH et al. 
Residual symptoms after remission of major de-
pressive disorder with citalopram and risk of re-
lapse: a STAR*D report. Psychol Med 2010;40:41-  
50.
72. McIntyre RS, Cha DS, Soczynska JK et al. Cogni-
tive deficits and functional outcomes in major de-
pressive disorder: determinants, substrates, and  
treatment interventions. Depress Anxiety 2013;  
30:515- 27.
73. Rosenblat JD, Simon GE, Sachs GS et al. Frequen-
cy of use and perceived helpfulness of wellness 
strategies for bipolar and unipolar depression. 
Ann Clin Psychiatry 2018;30:296- 304.
74. IsHak WW, Steiner AJ, Klimowicz A et al. Major depression comorbid with medical conditions: 
analysis of quality of life, functioning, and depres -
sive symptom severity. Psychopharmacol Bull 
2018;48:8- 25.
75. IsHak WW, Mirocha J, James D et al. Quality of life 
in major depressive disorder before/after multiple 
steps of treatment and one- year follow- up. Acta  
Psychiatr Scand 2015;131:51- 60.
76. McIntyre RS, Florea I, Tonnoir B et al. Efficacy of 
vortioxetine on cognitive functioning in working 
patients with major depressive disorder. J Clin 
Psy chiatry 2017;78:115- 21.
77. IsHak WW, James DM, Mirocha J et al. Patient-  
reported functioning in major depressive disor -
der. Ther Adv Chronic Dis 2016;7:160- 9.
78. IsHak WW, Greenberg JM, Cohen RM. Predicting 
relapse in major depressive disorder using pa-
tient-reported outcomes of depressive symptom 
severity, functioning, and quality of life in the In-
dividual Burden of Illness Index for Depression 
(IBI- D). J Affect Disord 2013;151:59- 65.
79. Firth J, Siddiqi N, Koyanagi A et al. The Lancet 
Psychiatry Commission: a blueprint for protect -
ing physical health in people with mental illness. 
Lancet Psychiatry 2019;6:675- 712.
80. de Menezes Galvão AC, Almeida RN, de Sousa 
GM Jr et al. Pathophysiology of major depression 
by clinical stages. Front Psychol 2021;12:641779.
81. Cuijpers P , Quero S, Noma H et al. Psychothera  pies 
for depression: a network meta- analysis cov  ering 
efficacy, acceptability and long- term outcomes  
of all main treatment types. World Psychi  atry 2021;  
20:283- 93.
82. Kessler RC, Kazdin AE, Aguilar- Gaxiola S et al. 
Patterns and correlates of patient- reported help-
fulness of treatment for common mental and sub-
stance use disorders in the WHO World Mental 
Health Surveys. World Psychiatry 2022;21:272-  86.
83. Lundberg J, Cars T, Lööv SÅ et al. Association of 
treatment- resistant depression with patient out -
comes and health care resource utilization in a pop -
ulation- wide study. JAMA Psychiatry 2023; 80: 
167- 75.
84. Rush AJ, Sackeim HA, Conway CR et al. Clinical 
research challenges posed by difficult- to- treat de-
pression. Psychol Med 2022;52:419- 32.
85. Zhang C, Virani S, Mayes T et al. Toward a defini-
tion of “no meaningful benefit” from antidepres -
sant treatment: an equipercentile analysis with 
cross- trial validation across multiple rating scales.  
J Clin Psychiatry 2022;83:21m14239.
86. Turkoz I, Alphs L, Singh J et al. Clinically mean-
ingful changes on depressive symptom measures 
and patient- reported outcomes in patients with 
treatment- resistant depression. Acta Psychiatr 
Scand 2021;143:253- 63.
87. Conway CR, Kumar A, Xiong W et al. Chronic 
vagus nerve stimulation significantly improves 
quality of life in treatment- resistant major depres -
sion. J Clin Psychiatry 2018;79:18m12178.
88. Morrens J, Mathews M, Popova V et al. Use of 
Clinical Global Impressions-  Severity (CGI-  S) to as -
sess response to antidepressant treatment in pa-
tients with treatment- resistant depression. Neu-
ropsychiatr Dis Treat 2022;18:1127- 32.
89. McIntyre RS, Lipsitz O, Lui LMW et al. The 
meaningful change threshold as measured 
by the 16- item Quick Inventory of Depressive 
Symptom  atology in adults with treatment-  
resistant major depressive and bipolar disorder 
receiving intravenous ketamine. J Affect Disord 
2021;294: 592- 6.
90. Demyttenaere K, Kiekens G, Bruffaerts R et al. Outcome in depression (I): why symptomatic re-
mission is not good enough. CNS Spectr 2021;  
26: 393- 9.
91. Demyttenaere K, Kiekens G, Bruffaerts R et al. 
Outcome in depression (II): beyond the Hamilton  
Depression Rating Scale. CNS Spectr 2021;26:  
378- 82.
92. Rosenblat JD, Simon GE, Sachs GS et al. Treat -
ment effectiveness and tolerability outcomes that  
are most important to individuals with bipolar  
and unipolar depression. J Affect Disord 2019;  
243:116- 20.
93. McAllister-  Williams RH, Aaronson ST, Conway 
CR et al. The “difficult- to- treat depression” and the 
“response paradigm” models: implications and  
relevance to patient management. Aust N Z J Psy-
chiatry 2021;55:824- 5.
94. McAllister- Williams RH, Arango C, Blier P et al. 
Reconceptualising treatment- resistant depres -
sion as difficult- to- treat depression. Lancet Psy-
chiatry 2021;8:14- 5.
95. McCue M, Parikh SV , Mucha L et al. Adapting the 
goal attainment approach for major depressive 
disorder. Neurol Ther 2019;8:167- 76.
96. McCue M, Sarkey S, Eramo A et al. Using the Goal 
Attainment Scale adapted for depression to better 
understand treatment outcomes in patients with 
major depressive disorder switching to vortiox -
etine: a phase 4, single- arm, open- label, multi-
center study. BMC Psychiatry 2021;21:622.
97. Henssler J, Bschor T, Baethge C. Combination 
antidepressant therapy vs monotherapy –   further 
considerations –  reply. JAMA Psychiatry 2022; 79: 
832- 3.
98. Liu X, Mukai Y, Furtek CI et al. Epidemiology of 
treatment- resistant depression in the United 
States. J Clin Psychiatry 2021;83:21m13964.
99. Thomas L, Kessler D, Campbell J et al. Prevalence 
of treatment- resistant depression in primary  
care: cross-  sectional data. Br J Gen Pract 2013; 63: 
e852- 8.
100.  Fife D, Reps J, Cepeda MS et al. Treatment resist -
ant depression incidence estimates from studies 
of health insurance databases depend strongly 
on the details of the operating definition. Heliyon 
2018;4:e00707.
101.  Sharman Moser S, Chodick G, Gelerstein S et al. 
Epidemiology of treatment resistant depression 
among major depressive disorder patients in Is -
rael. BMC Psychiatry 2022;22:541.
102.  Fekadu A, Demissie M, Birhane R et al. Under de-
tection of depression in primary care settings in 
low and middle- income countries: a systematic 
review and meta- analysis. Syst Rev 2022;11:21.
103.  National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. 
Depression in adults. London: National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence, 2018.
104.  Martin- Cook K, Palmer L, Thornton L et al. Setting 
measurement- based care in motion: practical  
lessons in the implementation and integration of 
measurement- based care in psychiatry clinical 
practice. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 2021;17:1621-  
31.
105.  Mitchell AJ, Rao S, Vaze A. International compari-
son of clinicians’ ability to identify depression in 
primary care: meta- analysis and meta- regression 
of predictors. Br J Gen Pract 2011;61:e72- 80.
106.  Pence BW, O’Donnell JK, Gaynes BN. The de-
pression treatment cascade in primary care: a 
public health perspective. Curr Psychiatry Rep 
2012;14:328- 35.
107.  Ruhé HG, van Rooijen G, Spijker J et al. Staging 
methods for treatment resistant depression. A 
408 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023
systematic review. J Affect Disord 2012;137:35-  
45.
108.  McAllister- Williams RH, Arango C, Blier P et al.  
The identification, assessment and management 
of difficult-  to- treat depression: an international  
consensus statement. J Affect Disord 2020;267:  
264- 82.
109.  Azar AR, Chopra MP , Cho LY et al. Remission in 
major depression: results from a geriatric primary  
care population. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 2011;26:  
48- 55.
110. Cooper C, Katona C, Lyketsos K et al. A systemat -
ic review of treatments for refractory depression 
in older people. Am J Psychiatry 2011;168:681- 8.
111.  Cuijpers P , Karyotaki E, Eckshtain D et al. Psy-
chotherapy for depression across different age 
groups: a systematic review and meta- analysis. 
JAMA Psychiatry 2020;77:694- 702.
112.  Dominiak M, Antosik- Wójcin ´ska AZ, Wojnar 
M et al. Electroconvulsive therapy and age: ef -
fectiveness, safety and tolerability in the treat -
ment of major depression among patients un -
der and over 65 years of age. Pharmaceuticals 
2021;14:582.
113.  Kaster TS, Daskalakis ZJ, Noda Y et al. Efficacy, 
tolerability, and cognitive effects of deep transcra-
nial magnetic stimulation for late- life depression: 
a prospective randomized controlled trial. Neu-
ropsychopharmacology 2018;43:2231- 8.
114.  Lähteenvuo M, Taipale H, Tanskanen A et al.  
Courses of treatment and risk factors for treat -
ment- resistant depression in Finnish primary and  
special healthcare: a nationwide cohort study. J 
Affect Disord 2022;308:236- 42.
115.  Cepeda MS, Kern DM, Nicholson S. Treatment 
resistant depression in women with peripartum  
depression. BMC Pregnancy Childbirth 2019;19:  
323.
116.  Kuehner C. Why is depression more common 
among women than among men? Lancet Psy-
chiatry 2017;4:146- 58.
117.  Trivedi MH, Rush AJ, Wisniewski SR et al. Evalu-
ation of outcomes with citalopram for depres -
sion using measurement- based care in STAR*D: 
implications for clinical practice. Am J Psychiatry 
2006;163:28- 40.
118.  IsHak WW, Bonifay W, Collison K et al. The recov -
ery index: a novel approach to measuring recov -
ery and predicting remission in major depressive 
disorder. J Affect Disord 2017;208:369- 74.
119. Teicher MH, Gordon JB, Nemeroff CB. Recogniz-
ing the importance of childhood maltreatment 
as a critical factor in psychiatric diagnoses, treat -
ment, research, prevention, and education. Mol 
Psychiatry 2022;27:1331- 8.
120.  Wang T, Li L, Yue Y et al. The interaction of P11 
methylation and early- life stress impacts the anti-
depressant response in patients with major de -
pressive disorder. J Affect Disord 2022;312:128-  
35.
121.  Yang JZ, Kang CY, Yuan J et al. Effect of adverse 
childhood experiences on hypothalamic-  pitu-
itary- adrenal (HPA) axis function and antide-
pressant efficacy in untreated first episode pa -
tients with major depressive disorder. Psycho-
neuroendocrinology 2021;134:105432.
122.  Menke A, Nitschke F , Hellmuth A et al. Stress im -
pairs response to antidepressants via HPA axis 
and immune system activation. Brain Behav Im-
mun 2021;93:132- 40.
123.  Williams LM, Debattista C, Duchemin AM et al.  
Childhood trauma predicts antidepressant re-
sponse in adults with major depression: data from  the randomized international study to predict 
optimized treatment for depression. Transl Psy-
chiatry 2016;6:e799.
124.  Kaplan MJ, Klinetob NA. Childhood emotional 
trauma and chronic posttraumatic stress disor -
der in adult outpatients with treatment-  resistant 
depression. J Nerv Ment Dis 2000;188:596- 601.
125.  McAllister- Williams RH. When depression is dif -
ficult to treat. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2022;  
56:89- 91.
126.  Christensen MC, Florea I, Loft H et al. Efficacy 
of vortioxetine in patients with major depressive 
disorder reporting childhood or recent trauma. J 
Affect Disord 2020;263:258- 66.
127.  O’Brien B, Lijffijt M, Wells A et al. The impact of  
childhood maltreatment on intravenous keta-
mine outcomes for adult patients with treatment-  
resistant depression. Pharmaceuticals 2019;12:  
133.
128.  Yrondi A, Vaiva G, Walter M et al. Childhood trau-
ma increases suicidal behaviour in a treatment-  
resistant depression population: a FACE- DR re-
port. J Psychiatr Res 2021;135:20- 7.
129.  Scott J, Eccleston D, Boys R. Can we predict the 
persistence of depression? Br J Psychiatry 1992;  
161:633- 7.
130. McIntyre RS, Berk M, Brietzke E et al. Bipolar dis -
orders. Lancet 2020;396:1841- 56.
131.  McIntyre RS, Ng- Mak D, Chuang CC et al. Major 
depressive disorder with subthreshold hypo-
manic (mixed) features: a real- world assessment 
of treat  ment patterns and economic burden. J Af -
fect Disord 2017;210:332- 7.
132.  Cao B, Zhu J, Zuckerman H et al. Pharmacologi-
cal interventions targeting anhedonia in patients 
with major depressive disorder: a systematic re-
view. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychia-
try 2019;92:109- 17.
133.  Goodwin GM, Price J, De Bodinat C et al. Emo-
tional blunting with antidepressant treatments: a 
survey among depressed patients. J Affect Disord 
2017;221:31- 5.
134.  Millan MJ, Agid Y, Brüne M et al. Cognitive dys -
function in psychiatric disorders: characteristics, 
causes and the quest for improved therapy. Nat 
Rev Drug Discov 2012;11:141- 68.
135.  Rosenblat JD, Kakar R, McIntyre RS. The cogni-
tive effects of antidepressants in major depressive 
disorder: a systematic review and meta- analysis 
of randomized clinical trials. Int J Neuropsycho-
pharmacol 2015;19:pyv082.
136.  Ang YS, Bruder GE, Keilp JG et al. Exploration of  
baseline and early changes in neurocogni-
tive characteristics as predictors of treatment re-
sponse to bupropion, sertraline, and placebo in 
the EMBARC clinical trial. Psychol Med 2022;52:  
2441- 9.
137.  Kessler RC, Sampson NA, Berglund P et al. Anx -
ious and non- anxious major depressive disorder 
in the World Health Organization World Mental 
Health Surveys. Epidemiol Psychiatr Sci 2015;  
24:210- 26.
138.  Robinson OJ, Vytal K, Cornwell BR et al. The im-
pact of anxiety upon cognition: perspectives from 
human threat of shock studies. Front Hum Neu -
rosci 2013;7:203.
139.  Trombello JM, Pizzagalli DA, Weissman MM et 
al. Characterizing anxiety subtypes and the re-
lationship to behavioral phenotyping in major 
depression: results from the EMBARC study. J 
Psychiatr Res 2018;102:207- 15.
140.  Yoo I, Woo JM, Lee SH et al. Influence of anxiety 
symptoms on improvement of neurocognitive functions in patients with major depressive dis -
order: a 12- week, multicenter, randomized trial 
of tianeptine versus escitalopram, the CAMPION 
study. J Affect Disord 2015;185:24- 30.
141.  Fava M, Rush AJ, Alpert JE et al. Difference in 
treatment outcome in outpatients with anxious 
versus nonanxious depression: a STAR*D report. 
Am J Psychiatry 2008;165:342- 51.
142.  Kautzky A, Dold M, Bartova L et al. Clinical fac -
tors predicting treatment resistant depression: af -
firmative results from the European multicenter 
study. Acta Psychiatr Scand 2019;139:78- 88.
143.  McIntyre RS, Schaffer A, Beaulieu S. The Cana-
dian Network for Mood and Anxiety Treatments 
(CANMAT) task force recommendations for the 
management of patients with mood disorders 
and comorbid conditions. Ann Clin Psychiatry 
2012;24:2- 3.
144.  Cao B, Xu J, Li R et al. Interventions targeting 
comorbid depression and overweight/obesity: a 
systematic review. J Affect Disord 2022;314:222-  
32.
145.  Grigolon RB, Trevizol AP , Gerchman F et al. Is 
obesity a determinant of success with pharma-
cological treatment for depression? A systematic 
review, meta- analysis and meta- regression. J Af -
fect Disord 2021;287:54- 68.
146.  Rashidian H, Subramaniapillai M, Park C et al. 
Changes in insulin resistance following antide-
pressant treatment mediate response in major  
depressive disorder. J Psychopharmacol 2023;37:  
313- 7.
147.  Toups MSP , Myers AK, Wisniewski SR et al. Re-
lationship between obesity and depression: char -
acteristics and treatment outcomes with antide-
pressant medication. Psychosom Med 2013;75:  
863- 72.
148.  Woo YS, Seo HJ, McIntyre RS et al. Obesity and 
its potential effects on antidepressant treatment 
outcomes in patients with depressive disorders: a 
literature review. Int J Mol Sci 2016;17:80.
149. Vogelzangs N, Beekman ATF , van Reedt Dortland 
AKB et al. Inflammatory and metabolic dysregu-
lation and the 2- year course of depressive disor -
ders in antidepressant users. Neuropsychophar -
macology 2014;39:1624- 34.
150.  Fanelli G, Serretti A. Depression, antidepres -
sants, and insulin resistance: which link? Eur 
Neuropsychopharmacol 2022;60:4- 6.
151.  Beran M, Muzambi R, Geraets A et al. The bi-
directional longitudinal association between 
depressive symptoms and HbA1c: a systematic  
review and meta- analysis. Diabet Med 2022;39:  
e14671.
152.  Pan A, Keum N, Okereke OI et al. Bidirectional 
association between depression and metabolic  
syndrome: a systematic review and meta-  analysis  
of epidemiological studies. Diabetes Care 2012;  
35:1171- 80.
153.  Nierenberg AA, Amsterdam JD. Treatment- re-
sistant depression: definition and treatment ap-
proaches. J Clin Psychiatry 1990;51(Suppl.):39-
 47.
154.  Rush AJ, Thase ME. Improving depression out -
come by patient- centered medical management. 
Am J Psychiatry 2018;175:1187- 98.
155.  Mitchell AJ, Vaze A, Rao S. Clinical diagnosis of 
depression in primary care: a meta- analysis. Lan-
cet 2009;374:609- 19.
156.  McIntyre RS, Calabrese JR. Bipolar depression: 
the clinical characteristics and unmet needs of 
a complex disorder. Curr Med Res Opin 2019;35:  
1993- 2005.
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 409
157.  Li CT, Bai YM, Huang YL et al. Association be-
tween antidepressant resistance in unipolar de-
pression and subsequent bipolar disorder: cohort  
study. Br J Psychiatry 2012;200:45- 51.
158.  Elefante C, Brancati GE, Petrucci A et al. Risk of 
conversion to bipolar disorder in patients with 
late- onset major depression. Int Clin Psycho-
pharmacol 2022;37:234- 41.
159.  Goldberg JF , Nierenberg AA, Iosifescu DV . Wres -
tling with antidepressant use in bipolar dis  order: 
the ongoing debate. J Clin Psychiatry 2021;82:  
19ac13181.
160.  McIntyre RS, Patel MD, Masand PS et al. The 
Rapid Mood Screener (RMS): a novel and prag-
matic screener for bipolar I disorder. Curr Med 
Res Opin 2021;37:135- 44.
161. Cerimele JM, Russo J, Bauer AM et al. The Patient 
Mania Questionnaire (PMQ- 9): a brief scale for 
assessing and monitoring manic symptoms. J 
Gen Intern Med 2022;37:1680- 7.
162.  Villagonzalo KA, Dodd S, Ng F et al. The utility of 
the Mood Disorder Questionnaire as a screen-
ing tool in a methadone maintenance treatment 
 program. Int J Psychiatry Clin Pract 2010;14:150-  
3.
163.  Meyer TD, Hammelstein P , Nilsson L- G et al. 
The Hypomania Checklist (HCL- 32): its factorial 
structure and association to indices of impair -
ment in German and Swedish nonclinical sam-
ples. Compr Psychiatry 2007;48:79- 87.
164.  Sackeim HA. The definition and meaning of 
treatment-  resistant depression. J Clin Psychiatry 
2001;62(Suppl. 16):10- 7.
165.  Sackeim HA, Aaronson ST, Bunker MT et al. The 
assessment of resistance to antidepressant treat -
ment: rationale for the Antidepressant Treatment 
History Form: Short Form (ATHF-  SF). J Psychiatr 
Res 2019;113:125- 36.
166.  Chandler GM, Iosifescu DV , Pollack MH et al. 
Validation of the Massachusetts General Hospital 
Antidepressant Treatment History Questionnaire 
(ATRQ). CNS Neurosci Ther 2010;16:322- 5.
167.  Rush AJ, Trivedi MH, Wisniewski SR et al. Acute 
and longer- term outcomes in depressed outpa-
tients requiring one or several treatment steps: a 
STAR*D report. Am J Psychiatry 2006;163:1905-  
17.
168.  Szegedi A, Jansen WT, van Willigenburg APP et 
al. Early improvement in the first 2 weeks as a  
predictor of treatment outcome in patients with 
major depressive disorder: a meta- analysis includ-
ing 6562 patients. J Clin Psychiatry 2009;70:344-  
53.
169.  Pedrosa- Naudín MA, Gutiérrez-  Abejón E, Her -
rera- Gómez F et al. Non- adherence to antide-
pressant treatment and related factors in a region 
of Spain: a population- based registry study. Phar -
maceutics 2022;14:2696.
170.  Topp CW, Østergaard SD, Søndergaard S et al. The 
WHO-  5 Well-  Being Index: a systematic review  
of the literature. Psychother Psychosom 2015;  
84:167- 76.
171.  Arnone D, Omar O, Arora T et al. Effectiveness of 
pharmacogenomic tests including CYP2D6 and 
CYP2C19 genomic variants for guiding the treat -
ment of depressive disorders: systematic review 
and meta- analysis of randomised controlled tri-
als. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2023;144:104965.
172.  Greden JF , Parikh SV , Rothschild AJ et al. Impact 
of pharmacogenomics on clinical outcomes in 
major depressive disorder in the GUIDED trial: 
a large, patient-  and rater- blinded, randomized, 
controlled study. J Psychiatr Res 2019;111:59- 67.173.  Rothschild AJ, Parikh SV , Hain D et al. Clinical 
validation of combinatorial pharmacogenomic 
testing and single- gene guidelines in predicting 
psychotropic medication blood levels and clini-
cal outcomes in patients with depression. Psy -
chiatry Res 2021;296:113649.
174.  Rosenblat JD, Lee Y, McIntyre RS. Does pharma-
cogenomic testing improve clinical outcomes for 
major depressive disorder? A systematic review 
of clinical trials and cost- effectiveness studies. J 
Clin Psychiatry 2017;78:720- 9.
175. Piacentino D, Bianchi E, De Donatis D et al. Ther -
apeutic drug monitoring of antidepressants: an un-
derused but potentially valuable tool in primary 
care. Front Psychiatry 2022;13:867840.
176.  Funk CSM, Hart XM, Gründer G et al. Is thera-
peutic drug monitoring relevant for antidepres -
sant drug therapy? implications from a system-
atic review and meta- analysis with focus on 
moderating factors. Front Psychiatry 2022;13:  
826138.
177.  Cellini L, De Donatis D, Zernig G et al. Antide-
pressant efficacy is correlated with plasma levels: 
mega- analysis and further evidence. Int Clin Psy-
chopharmacol 2022;37:29- 37.
178.  Henssler J, Kurschus M, Franklin J et al. Trajec -
tories of acute antidepressant efficacy: how long 
to wait for response? A systematic review and  
meta- analysis of long- term, placebo- controlled 
acute treatment trials. J Clin Psychiatry 2018; 79: 
17r11470.
179.  Brignone M, Diamand F , Painchault C et al. Effi -
cacy and tolerability of switching therapy to vor -
tioxetine versus other antidepressants in patients 
with major depressive disorder. Curr Med Res 
Opin 2016;32:351- 66.
180.  Bschor T, Kern H, Henssler J et al. Switching the 
antidepressant after nonresponse in adults with  
major depression: a systematic literature search  
and meta- analysis. J Clin Psychiatry 2018;79:  
16r10749.
181.  Papakostas GI, Thase ME, Fava M et al. Are anti-
depressant drugs that combine serotonergic and  
noradrenergic mechanisms of action more effec -
tive than the selective serotonin reuptake inhib-
itors in treating major depressive disorder? A meta-  
analysis of studies of newer agents. Biol Psychia -
try 2007;62:1217- 27.
182.  Fagiolini A, Florea I, Loft H et al. Effectiveness of 
vortioxetine on emotional blunting in patients 
with major depressive disorder with inadequate 
response to SSRI/SNRI treatment. J Affect Disord 
2021;283:472- 9.
183. Grover D, Tom M, Maguire G et al. Polypharmacy 
–  purpose, benefits and limitations. Curr Med 
Chem 2022;29:5606- 14.
184. Mojtabai R, Olfson M. National trends in psycho-
tropic medication polypharmacy in office- based 
psychiatry. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2010;67:26- 36.
185.  Dold M, Kautzky A, Bartova L et al. Pharmacolog-
ical treatment strategies in unipolar depression  
in European tertiary psychiatric treatment cen -    
ters –   A pharmacoepidemiological cross-  sectional  
multicenter study. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 
2016;26:1960- 71.
186.  Taylor RW, Marwood L, Oprea E et al. Pharma-
cological augmentation in unipolar depression: a 
guide to the guidelines. Int J Neuropsychophar -
macol 2020;23:587- 625.
187.  Strawbridge R, Carter B, Marwood L et al. Aug-
mentation therapies for treatment- resistant de-
pression: systematic review and meta- analysis. 
Br J Psychiatry 2019;214:42- 51.188.  Scott F , Hampsey E, Gnanapragasam S et al. Sys -
tematic review and meta- analysis of augmenta-
tion and combination treatments for early-  stage 
treatment- resistant depression. J Psychopharma-
col 2023;37:268- 78.
189. Henssler J, Alexander D, Schwarzer G et al. Com-
bining antidepressants vs antidepressant mono -
therapy for treatment of patients with acute de-
pression: a systematic review and meta- analysis. 
JAMA Psychiatry 2022;79:300- 12.
190.  Zhou Y, Wang C, Lan X, et al. The effectiveness 
of repeated intravenous ketamine on subjective 
and objective psychosocial function in patients 
with treatment- resistant depression and suicidal 
ideation. J Affect Disord 2022;304:78- 84.
191.  McIntyre RS, Carvalho IP , Lui LMW et al. The ef -
fect of intravenous, intranasal, and oral ketamine 
in mood disorders: a meta- analysis. J Affect Dis -
ord 2020;276:576- 84.
192.  Fava M, Freeman MP , Flynn M et al. Double-  
blind, placebo- controlled, dose- ranging trial of 
intravenous ketamine as adjunctive therapy in 
treatment- resistant depression (TRD). Mol Psy-
chiatry 2020;25:1592- 603.
193.  McIntyre RS, Rodrigues NB, Lee Y et al. The ef -
fectiveness of repeated intravenous ketamine on  
depressive symptoms, suicidal ideation and func -
tional disability in adults with major depressive 
disorder and bipolar disorder: results from the 
Canadian Rapid Treatment Center of Excellence. 
J Affect Disord 2020;274:903- 10.
194.  Daly EJ, Singh JB, Fedgchin M et al. Efficacy and 
safety of intranasal esketamine adjunctive to oral 
antidepressant therapy in treatment- resistant de-
pression: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psy-
chiatry 2018;75:139- 48.
195.  Wajs E, Aluisio L, Holder R et al. Esketamine 
nasal spray plus oral antidepressant in patients 
with treatment- resistant depression: assessment 
of long- term safety in a phase 3, open- label 
study (SUSTAIN- 2). J Clin Psychiatry 2020;81:  
19m12891.
196.  Zheng W, Yang XH, Gu LM et al. Antianhedonic 
effects of serial intravenous subanaesthetic keta-
mine in anxious versus nonanxious depression. J 
Affect Disord 2022;313:72- 6.
197. Nogo D, Jasrai AK, Kim H et al. The effect of keta -
mine on anhedonia: improvements in dimen -
sions of anticipatory, consummatory, and moti-
vation- related reward deficits. Psychopharma-
cology 2022;239:2011- 39.
198.  Zheng W, Gu LM, Zhou YL et al. Association of 
VEGF with antianhedonic effects of repeated-  
dose intravenous ketamine in treatment- refrac -
tory depression. Front Psychiatry 2021;12:780975.
199.  Wilkowska A, Wiglusz MS, Gałuszko-  Wegielnik 
M et al. Antianhedonic effect of repeated keta-
mine infusions in patients with treatment 
resis  tant depression. Front Psychiatry 2021;12:  
704330.
200. Dold M, Bartova L, Kasper S. Treatment response 
of add-  on esketamine nasal spray in resistant 
ma jor depression in relation to add-  on second-  
generation antipsychotic treatment. Int J Neu-
ropsychopharmacol 2020;23:440- 5.
201.  Vázquez GH, Bahji A, Undurraga J et al. Efficacy 
and tolerability of combination treatments for 
major depression: antidepressants plus second-  
generation antipsychotics vs. esketamine vs. lith-
ium. J Psychopharmacol 2021;35:890- 900.
202.  Wilkinson ST, Rhee TG, Joormann J et al. Cogni-
tive behavioral therapy to sustain the antidepres -
sant effects of ketamine in treatment-  resistant de -
410 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023
pression: a randomized clinical trial. Psychother  
Psychosom 2021;90:318- 27.
203.  Reif A. Esketamine nasal spray improves short 
and long term outcomes compared with quetia-
pine extended release in patients with treatment 
resistant depression: First results from ESCAPE 
TRD, a randomised, multi centre phase IIIb clini-
cal trial. Presented at the Congress of the German 
Society of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Berlin, 
November 2022.
204.  Rodrigues NB, Siegel A, Lipsitz O et al. Effective-
ness of intravenous ketamine in mood disorder 
patients with a history of neurostimulation. CNS 
Spectr 2022;27:315- 21.
205.  McIntyre RS, Rosenblat JD, Nemeroff CB et al. 
Synthesizing the evidence for ketamine and eske -
tamine in treatment- resistant depression: an 
international expert opinion on the available 
evidence and implementation. Am J Psychiatry 
2021;178:383- 99.
206.  Schatzberg AF . A word to the wise about intrana-
sal esketamine. Am J Psychiatry 2019;176:422- 4.
207.  Corya SA, Sanger TM, Van Campen LE et al. Olan -
zapine/fluoxetine combination for treat ment-  
resistant depression: a controlled study of SSRI 
and nortriptyline resistance. J Clin Psychiatry 2005;  
66:1289- 97.
208.  Corya SA, Williamson D, Sanger TM et al. A ran-
domized, double- blind comparison of olanzap -
ine/fluoxetine combination, olanzapine, fluox -
etine, and venlafaxine in treatment- resistant 
depression. Depress Anxiety 2006;23:364- 72.
209.  Thase ME, Corya SA, Osuntokun O et al. A ran-
domized, double-  blind comparison of olanzapine/  
fluoxetine combination, olanzapine, and fluox -
etine in treatment- resistant major depressive dis -
order. J Clin Psychiatry 2007;68:224- 36.
210.  Berman RM, Marcus RN, Swanink R et al. The 
efficacy and safety of aripiprazole as adjunctive 
therapy in major depressive disorder: a multi-
center, randomized, double-  blind, placebo-  con-
trolled study. J Clin Psychiatry 2007;68:843- 53.
211.  Mahmoud RA, Pandina GJ, Turkoz I et al. Risperi-
done for treatment- refractory major depressive 
disorder: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med 
2007; 147:593- 602.
212.  McIntyre A, Gendron A, McIntyre A. Quetiapine 
adjunct to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
or venlafaxine in patients with major depression, 
comorbid anxiety, and residual depressive symp-
toms: a randomized, placebo- controlled pilot 
study. Depress Anxiety 2007;24:487- 94.
213.  Marcus RN, McQuade RD, Carson WH et al. The  
efficacy and safety of aripiprazole as adjunctive  
therapy in major depressive disorder: a second  
multicenter, randomized, double- blind, placebo-  
controlled study. J Clin Psychopharmacol 2008;  
28:156- 65.
214.  Reeves H, Batra S, May RS et al. Efficacy of ris -
peridone augmentation to antidepressants in the  
management of suicidality in major depressive  
disorder: a randomized, double- blind, placebo-  
controlled pilot study. J Clin Psychiatry 2008;69:  
1228- 36.
215.  Bauer M, Pretorius HW, Constant EL et al. Ex -
tended-  release quetiapine as adjunct to an anti -
depressant in patients with major depressive dis -
order: results of a randomized, placebo- con trolled, 
double- blind study. J Clin Psychiatry 2009; 70:540-  
9.
216.  Berman RM, Fava M, Thase ME et al. Aripipra-
zole augmentation in major depressive disorder: 
a double- blind, placebo- controlled study in pa-tients with inadequate response to antidepres -
sants. CNS Spectr 2009;14:197- 206.
217.  Keitner GI, Garlow SJ, Ryan CE et al. A random-
ized, placebo- controlled trial of risperidone aug-
mentation for patients with difficult- to- treat uni-
polar, non-  psychotic major depression. J Psychi-
atr Res 2009;43:205- 14.
218.  El- Khalili N, Joyce M, Atkinson S et al. Extended-  
release quetiapine fumarate (quetiapine XR) as 
adjunctive therapy in major depressive disorder 
(MDD) in patients with an inadequate response to  
ongoing antidepressant treatment: a multicentre, 
randomized, double- blind, placebo- controlled 
study. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol 2010;13:917-  
32.
219.  Fava M, Mischoulon D, Iosifescu D et al. A double-  
blind, placebo- controlled study of aripiprazole 
adjunctive to antidepressant therapy among de -
pressed outpatients with inadequate response to 
prior antidepressant therapy (ADAPT-  A Study). 
Psychother Psychosom 2012;81:87- 97.
220.  Thase ME, Youakim JM, Skuban A et al. Adjunctive 
brexpiprazole 1 and 3 mg for patients with major  
depressive disorder following inadequate re-
sponse to antidepressants: a phase 3, random-
ized, double- blind study. J Clin Psychiatry 2015;  
76:1232- 40.
221.  Thase ME, Youakim JM, Skuban A et al. Efficacy  
and safety of adjunctive brexpiprazole 2 mg in  
ma  jor depressive disorder: a phase 3, randomized,  
placebo-  controlled study in patients with inade -
quate response to antidepressants. J Clin Psychiatry 
2015;76:1224- 31.
222.  Durgam S, Earley W, Guo H et al. Efficacy and 
safety of adjunctive cariprazine in inadequate 
responders to antidepressants: a randomized, 
double- blind, placebo- controlled study in adult 
patients with major depressive disorder. J Clin 
Psychiatry 2016;77:371- 8.
223.  Earley WR, Guo H, Németh G et al. Cariprazine 
augmentation to antidepressant therapy in ma-
jor depressive disorder: results of a randomized, 
double-  blind, placebo-  controlled trial. Psycho-
pharmacol Bull 2018;48:62- 80.
224.  Fava M, Durgam S, Earley W et al. Efficacy of ad-
junctive low- dose cariprazine in major depres -
sive disorder: a randomized, double- blind, place-
bo-  controlled trial. Int Clin Psychopharmacol 
2018;33:312- 21.
225.  Cha DS, McIntyre RS. Treatment- emergent ad-
verse events associated with atypical antipsychot -
ics. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2012;13:1587- 98.
226.  Mohamed S, Johnson GR, Chen P et al. Effect of 
antidepressant switching vs augmentation on 
remission among patients with major depres -
sive disorder unresponsive to antidepressant 
treatment: the VAST- D randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA 2017;318:132- 45.
227.  Li H, Cui L, Li J et al. Comparative efficacy and 
acceptability of neuromodulation procedures in 
the treatment of treatment- resistant depression: 
a network meta- analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. J Affect Disord 2021;287:115- 24.
228.  Spurny- Dworak B, Godbersen GM, Reed MB et 
al. The impact of theta- burst stimulation on cor -
tical GABA and glutamate in treatment- resistant 
depression: a surface- based MRSI analysis ap-
proach. Front Mol Neurosci 2022;15:913274.
229.  Holtzheimer PE, Husain MM, Lisanby SH et al. 
Subcallosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for 
treatment- resistant depression: a multisite, ran-
domised, sham- controlled trial. Lancet Psychia-
try 2017;4:839- 49.230.  Bulteau S, Laurin A, Pere M et al. Intermittent 
theta burst stimulation (iTBS) versus 10 Hz high-  
frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stim-
ulation (rTMS) to alleviate treatment- resistant 
unipolar depression: a randomized controlled 
trial (THETA- DEP). Brain Stimul 2022;15: 870-  
80.
231.  Chen L, Thomas EHX, Kaewpijit P et al. Acceler -
ated theta burst stimulation for the treatment of 
depression: a randomised controlled trial. Brain 
Stimul 2021;14:1095- 105.
232. Daskalakis ZJ, McClintock SM, Hadas I et al. Con-
firmatory Efficacy and Safety Trial of Magnetic 
Seizure Therapy for Depression (CREST- MST): 
protocol for identification of novel biomarkers 
via neurophysiology. Trials 2021;22:906.
233.  Adu MK, Shalaby R, Chue P et al. Repetitive trans -
cranial magnetic stimulation for the treatment of 
resistant depression: a scoping review. Behav Sci 
2022;12:195.
234.  Kumar A, Bunker MT, Aaronson ST et al. Dura-
bility of symptomatic responses obtained with 
adjunctive vagus nerve stimulation in treatment-  
resistant depression. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat 
2019;15:457- 68.
235.  Sackeim HA, Dibué M, Bunker MT et al. The 
long and winding road of vagus nerve stimula-
tion: challenges in developing an intervention for 
difficult- to- treat mood disorders. Neuropsychiatr 
Dis Treat 2020;16:3081- 93.
236.  Kraus C, Quach D, Sholtes DM et al. Setting up 
a successful vagus nerve stimulation service for 
patients with difficult- to- treat depression. Neu-
romodulation 2022;25:316- 26.
237. Zandi PP , Morreale M, Reti IM et al. National Net -
work of Depression Centers’ recommendations 
on harmonizing clinical documentation of elec -
troconvulsive therapy. J ECT 2022;38:159- 64.
238.  Sackeim HA, Prudic J, Nobler MS et al. Effects of 
pulse width and electrode placement on the ef -
ficacy and cognitive effects of electroconvulsive 
therapy. Brain Stimul 2008;1:71- 83.
239. Grammer GG, Kuhle AR, Clark CC et al. Severity 
of depression predicts remission rates using trans -
cranial magnetic stimulation. Front Psychiatry 
2015;6:114.
240. Fitzgerald PB, Hoy KE, Anderson RJ et al. A study 
of the pattern of response to rTMS treatment in 
depression. Depress Anxiety 2016;33:746- 53.
241.  Kar SK. Predictors of response to repetitive trans -
cranial magnetic stimulation in depression: a 
review of recent updates. Clin Psychopharmacol 
Neurosci 2019;17:25- 33.
242.  Lisanby SH, Husain MM, Rosenquist PB et al. 
Daily left prefrontal repetitive transcranial mag -
netic stimulation in the acute treatment of major 
depression: clinical predictors of outcome in a 
multisite, randomized controlled clinical trial. 
Neuropsychopharmacology 2009;34:522- 34.
243.  Levkovitz Y, Isserles M, Padberg F et al. Efficacy 
and safety of deep transcranial magnetic stimu-
lation for major depression: a prospective mul-
ticenter randomized controlled trial. World Psy-
chiatry 2015;14:64- 73.
244. Zemplényi A, Józwiak- Hagymásy J, Kovács S et al. 
Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation may 
be a cost- effective alternative to antidepressant 
therapy after two treatment failures in patients 
with major depressive disorder. BMC Psychiatry 
2022;22:437.
245. Zhao YJ, Tor PC, Khoo AL et al. Cost- effectiveness 
modeling of repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation compared to electroconvulsive ther -
World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023 411
apy for treatment- resistant depression in Singa-
pore. Neuromodulation 2018;21:376- 82.
246.  Health Quality Ontario. Repetitive transcranial 
magnetic stimulation for treatment- resistant de-
pression: a systematic review and meta- analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Ont Health Tech-
nol Assess Ser 2016;16:1- 66.
247.  Hsu JH, Downar J, Vila- Rodriguez F et al. Impact 
of prior treatment on remission with intermittent 
theta burst versus high- frequency repetitive trans -
cranial magnetic stimulation in treatment resist -
ant depression. Brain Stimul 2019;12:1553- 5.
248.  Blumberger DM, Vila- Rodriguez F , Thorpe KE 
et al. Effectiveness of theta burst versus high-  
frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic stimu -
lation in patients with depression (THREE- D): a 
randomised non- inferiority trial. Lancet 2018;  
391:1683- 92.
249.  Cole EJ, Phillips AL, Bentzley BS et al. Stanford 
Neuromodulation Therapy (SNT): a double- blind  
randomized controlled trial. Am J Psychiatry 2022;  
179:132- 41.
250.  Daskalakis ZJ, Tamminga C, Throop A et al. Con-
firmatory Efficacy and Safety Trial of Magnetic 
Seizure Therapy for Depression (CREST- MST): 
study protocol for a randomized non- inferiority 
trial of magnetic seizure therapy versus electro-
convulsive therapy. Trials 2021;22:786.
251.  Tang VM, Blumberger DM, Throop A et al. Con -
tinuation magnetic seizure therapy for treatment-  
resistant unipolar or bipolar depression. J Clin 
Psychiatry 2021;82:20m13677.
252. Jiang J, Zhang C, Li C et al. Magnetic seizure ther -
apy for treatment- resistant depression. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev 2021;6:CD013528.
253.  Hitti FL, Cristancho MA, Yang AI et al. Deep brain 
stimulation of the ventral capsule/ventral stria -
tum for treatment- resistant depression: a dec -
ade of clinical follow- up. J Clin Psychiatry 2021;  
82:21m13973.
254.  Holtzheimer PE, Kelley ME, Gross RE et al. Sub-
callosal cingulate deep brain stimulation for treat -
ment- resistant unipolar and bipolar depression. 
Arch Gen Psychiatry 2012;69:150- 8.
255.  Dougherty DD, Rezai AR, Carpenter LL et al. A 
randomized sham- controlled trial of deep brain 
stimulation of the ventral capsule/ventral striatum 
for chronic treatment- resistant depression. Biol 
Psychiatry 2015;78:240- 8.
256. Kisely S, Li A, Warren N et al. A systematic review 
and meta- analysis of deep brain stimulation for 
depression. Depress Anxiety 2018;35:468- 80.
257. Zhou C, Zhang H, Qin Y et al. A systematic review 
and meta- analysis of deep brain stimulation in 
treatment- resistant depression. Prog Neuropsy-
chopharmacol Biol Psychiatry 2018;82:224- 32.
258.  Ramasubramanian V , Mathumathi S, Rajendhi-
ran G et al. A comparative study of the effect of 
electroconvulsive therapy and transcranial direct 
current stimulation in the treatment of persons 
suffering from treatment- resistant depression. 
Ind Psychiatry J 2022;31:68- 73.
259. Rhee TG, Shim SR, Forester BP et al. Efficacy and 
safety of ketamine vs electroconvulsive therapy 
among patients with major depressive episode: a 
systematic review and meta- analysis. JAMA Psy-
chiatry 2022;79:1162- 72.
260.  McHugh RK, Whitton SW, Peckham AD et al. 
Patient preference for psychological vs phar -
macologic treatment of psychiatric disorders: a 
meta- analytic review. J Clin Psychiatry 2013;74:  
595- 602.
261.  Furukawa TA, Shinohara K, Sahker E et al. Initial treatment choices to achieve sustained response 
in major depression: a systematic review and 
network meta- analysis. World Psychiatry 2021;  
20:387- 96.
262.  Boschloo L, Bekhuis E, Weitz ES et al. The symp -
tom-  specific efficacy of antidepressant medica -
tion vs. cognitive behavioral therapy in the treat -
ment of depression: results from an individual pa-
tient data meta- analysis. World Psychiatry 2019;  
18:183- 91.
263.  Nemeroff CB, Heim CM, Thase ME et al. Differ -
ential responses to psychotherapy versus phar -
macotherapy in patients with chronic forms of 
major depression and childhood trauma. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci USA 2003;100:14293- 6.
264.  Yrondi A, Aouizerate B, Bennabi D et al. Child-
hood maltreatment and clinical severity of treat -
ment- resistant depression in a French cohort of 
outpatients (FACE- DR): one- year follow- up. De-
press Anxiety 2020;37:365- 74.
265.  Ijaz S, Davies P , Williams CJ et al. Psychologi-
cal therapies for treatment- resistant depression  
in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2018;5:  
CD010558.
266.  Bartova L, Fugger G, Dold M et al. Combining 
psychopharmacotherapy and psychotherapy is 
not associated with better treatment outcome in 
major depressive disorder –  evidence from the 
European Group for the Study of Resistant De-
pression. J Psychiatr Res 2021;141:167- 75.
267.  Markowitz JC, Wright JH, Peeters F et al. The 
neglected role of psychotherapy for treatment-  
resistant depression. Am J Psychiatry 2022;179:90-  
3.
268. Eisendrath SJ, Gillung E, Delucchi KL et al. A ran-
domized controlled trial of mindfulness- based 
cognitive therapy for treatment-  resistant depres -
sion. Psychother Psychosom 2016;85:99- 110.
269.  Fonagy P , Rost F , Carlyle JA et al. Pragmatic ran-
domized controlled trial of long- term psycho-
analytic psychotherapy for treatment-  resistant 
depression: the Tavistock Adult Depression Study 
(TADS). World Psychiatry 2015;14:312- 21.
270. Hauksson P , Ingibergsdóttir S, Gunnarsdóttir T et 
al. Effectiveness of cognitive behaviour therapy 
for treatment- resistant depression with psychiat -
ric comorbidity: comparison of individual versus 
group CBT in an interdisciplinary rehabilitation 
setting. Nord J Psychiatry 2017;71:465- 72.
271. McPherson S, Cairns P , Carlyle J et al. The effec -
tiveness of psychological treatments for treat -
ment-  resistant depression: a systematic review.  
Acta Psychiatr Scand 2005;111:331- 40.
272. van Bronswijk S, Moopen N, Beijers L et al. Effec -
tiveness of psychotherapy for treatment- resistant 
depression: a meta- analysis and meta- regres -
sion. Psychol Med 2019;49:366- 79.
273.  Reiff CM, Richman EE, Nemeroff CB et al. Psyche-   
delics and psychedelic-  assisted psychotherapy. 
Am J Psychiatry 2020;177:391- 410.
274.  Goodwin GM, Aaronson ST, Alvarez O et al. 
Single- dose psilocybin for a treatment- resistant 
episode of major depression. N Engl J Med 2022;  
387:1637- 48.
275.  Siegel AN, Meshkat S, Benitah K et al. Registered  
clinical studies investigating psychedelic drugs for  
psychiatric disorders. J Psychiatr Res 2021;139:71-  
81.
276. Baune BT, Sampson E, Louise J et al. No evidence 
for clinical efficacy of adjunctive celecoxib with  
vortioxetine in the treatment of depression: a 6-  
week double- blind placebo controlled random-
ized trial. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol 2021;53:  34- 46.
277.  Crossley NA, Bauer M. Acceleration and aug-
mentation of antidepressants with lithium for 
depressive disorders: two meta- analyses of rand-
omized, placebo- controlled trials. J Clin Psychia-
try 2007;68:935- 40.
278.  Zazula R, Husain MI, Mohebbi M et al. Mino-
cycline as adjunctive treatment for major depres -
sive disorder: pooled data from two random-
ized controlled trials. Aust N Z J Psychiatry 2021;  
55:784- 98.
279.  Walker AJ, Kim Y, Borissiouk I et al. Statins: neu-
robiological underpinnings and mechanisms in 
mood disorders. Neurosci Biobehav Rev 2021; 128:  
693- 708.
280.  Nettis MA, Lombardo G, Hastings C et al. Aug -
mentation therapy with minocycline in treat ment-  
resistant depression patients with low- grade pe-
ripheral inflammation: results from a double-  
blind randomised clinical trial. Neuropsycho -
pharmacology 2021;46:939- 48.
281.  Liu Y, Zhou X, Zhu D et al. Is pindolol augmen-
tation effective in depressed patients resistant to  
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors? A sys -
tematic review and meta- analysis. Hum Psycho-
pharmacol 2015;30:132- 42.
282.  Lee HH, Blumberger DM, Lenze EJ et al. Low-  
dose augmentation with buprenorphine for treat -
ment- resistant depression: a multisite ran dom -
ized controlled trial with multimodal assessment 
of target engagement. Biol Psychiatry Glob Open 
Sci 2022;2:127- 35.
283.  Leavy MB, Boussios C, Phillips RL Jr et al. Out -
come measure harmonization and data infra-
structure for patient- centered outcomes research 
in depression: final report. Rockville: Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, 2022.
284.  Zimmerman M, Balling C, Chelminski I et al. 
Applying the inclusion/exclusion criteria in pla-
cebo- controlled studies to a clinical sample: a  
comparison of medications. J Affect Disord 2020;  
260:483- 8.
285.  McIntyre RS, Ismail Z, Watling CP et al. Patient-  
reported outcome measures for life engagement 
in mental health: a systematic review. J Patient 
Rep Outcomes 2022;6:62.
286.  Costa T, Menzat B, Engelthaler T et al. The burden 
associated with, and management of, difficult- to- 
treat depression in patients under specialist psy-
chiatric care in the United Kingdom. J Psycho-
pharmacol 2022;36:545- 56.
287.  Leichsenring F , Steinert C, Rabung S et al. The 
efficacy of psychotherapies and pharmacothera -
pies for mental disorders in adults: an umbrella 
review and meta- analytic evaluation of recent 
meta- analyses. World Psychiatry 2022; 21:133- 45.
288.  McKeown L, Taylor RW, Day E et al. Patient per -
spectives of lithium and quetiapine augmenta-
tion treatment in treatment- resistant depression: 
a qualitative assessment. J Psychopharmacol 
2022;36:557- 65.
289.  Smith-  Apeldoorn SY, Veraart JK, Spijker J et al. 
Maintenance ketamine treatment for depression: 
a systematic review of efficacy, safety, and toler -
ability. Lancet Psychiatry 2022;9:907- 21.
290.  Ragguett RM, Tamura JK, McIntyre RS. Keeping 
up with the clinical advances: depression. CNS 
Spectr 2019;24(Suppl. 1):25- 37.
291.  Torous J, Bucci S, Bell IH et al. The growing field 
of digital psychiatry: current evidence and the 
future of apps, social media, chatbots, and virtual 
reality. World Psychiatry 2021;20:318- 35.
292.  Chekroud AM, Bondar J, Delgadillo J et al. The 
412 World Psychiatry 22:3 - October 2023promise of machine learning in predicting treat -
ment outcomes in psychiatry. World Psychiatry 
2021;20:154- 70.
293.  Lee Y, Ragguett RM, Mansur RB et al. Applica -
tions of machine learning algorithms to predict therapeutic outcomes in depression: a meta-  
analysis and systematic review. J Affect Disord 
2018; 241:519- 32.
294.  Venkatesan A, Forster B, Rao P et al. Improve-
ments in depression outcomes following a digi-tal cognitive behavioral therapy intervention in 
a polychronic population: retrospective study. 
JMIR Form Res 2022;6:e38005.
DOI:10.1002/wps.21120